                               University of California
                                   Santa Barbara




      Efficient Algorithms for Graph Counting and
      Sampling from a Parameterized Perspective


                   A dissertation submitted in partial satisfaction
                         of the requirements for the degree

                                Doctor of Philosophy
                                         in
                                 Computer Science

                                          by

                               Úrsula Hébert-Johnson



Committee in charge:

     Professor Daniel Lokshtanov, Chair
     Professor Subhash Suri
     Professor Ambuj Singh
     Professor Eric Vigoda



                                     March 2025
The Dissertation of Úrsula Hébert-Johnson is approved.




                Professor Subhash Suri




                Professor Ambuj Singh




                 Professor Eric Vigoda




    Professor Daniel Lokshtanov, Committee Chair




                    February 2025
Efficient Algorithms for Graph Counting and Sampling
          from a Parameterized Perspective




                 Copyright © 2025

                         by

               Úrsula Hébert-Johnson




                         iii
A mi mamá, mi papá, y Maicito




              iv
                                Acknowledgements

I would like to thank my advisor Daniel Lokshtanov for all that I have learned in our
many meetings throughout my PhD. I have been very fortunate to have Daniel as my
advisor. Thank you for finding just the right research problems for me to work on and
for your guidance throughout the research process. And thank you for planning great
ski trips for our lab. I would also like to thank the members of my committee, Subhash
Suri, Ambuj Singh, and Eric Vigoda.
   I am grateful to my parents in countless ways, including for passing on their enthu-
siasm for math and snow sports, which helped to keep my proofs airtight and my skis
afloat during the past five years.
   Thank you to my friends for all of the wonderful hikes and deep conversations. My
original reason for going to graduate school was as much to meet great people and lifelong
friends as it was for future career reasons. That definitely ended up coming true.
   Finally and most importantly, thank you to Maicito for napping next to me while I
wrote this thesis.




                                            v
                               Curriculum Vitæ
                             Úrsula Hébert-Johnson

Education
2025                Ph.D. in Computer Science (Expected), University of California,
                    Santa Barbara
2018                B.S. in Mathematics, Stanford University

Publications

 1. Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time. Úrsula Hébert-
    Johnson and Daniel Lokshtanov. In preparation.
 2. Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time. Úrsula Hébert-
    Johnson and Daniel Lokshtanov. Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer
    Science (STACS), 2025.
 3. Parameterized Complexity of Kidney Exchange Revisited. Úrsula Hébert-Johnson,
    Daniel Lokshtanov, Chinmay Sonar, and Vaishali Surianarayanan. International
    Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2024.
 4. Min-Max Coverage Problems on Tree-Like Metrics. Eric Aaron, Úrsula Hébert-
    Johnson, Danny Krizanc, and Daniel Lokshtanov. Latin-American Algorithms,
    Graphs and Optimization Symposium (LAGOS), 2023.
 5. Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time. Úrsula
    Hébert-Johnson, Daniel Lokshtanov, and Eric Vigoda. European Symposium on
    Algorithms (ESA), 2023. Best ESA Paper Award.
 6. Anonymity-Preserving Space Partitions. Úrsula Hébert-Johnson, Chinmay Sonar,
    Subhash Suri, and Vaishali Surianarayanan. International Symposium on Algo-
    rithms and Computation (ISAAC), 2021.
 7. Multicalibration: Calibration for the (Computationally-Identifiable) Masses. Úrsula
    Hébert-Johnson, Michael Kim, Omer Reingold, and Guy Rothblum. International
    Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
 8. The Fibonacci Identities of Orthogonality. Kyle Hawkins, Úrsula Hébert-Johnson,
    and Benjamin Mathes. Linear Algebra and Its Applications, 475, 80-89, 2015.

Work Experience
January - September 2019          Software Engineer at Meta, Menlo Park, CA
October - December 2018           Software Engineer at Residential Energy Dynamics,
                                  Waterville, ME


                                          vi
                                      Abstract


                Efficient Algorithms for Graph Counting and Sampling
                           from a Parameterized Perspective

                                          by

                                Úrsula Hébert-Johnson


   Graph counting refers to counting how many n-vertex graphs belong to a particu-
lar graph class. This topic is closely intertwined with graph sampling, which refers to
generating random elements of a graph class (uniformly or approximately uniformly at
random). In this thesis, we develop algorithms for various graph counting and graph
sampling problems.
   For the class of chordal graphs, we present the first polynomial-time algorithm to
exactly compute the number of labeled chordal graphs on n vertices. In fact, our algo-
rithm solves a more general problem: given n and ω as input, it computes the number
of ω-colorable labeled chordal graphs on n vertices, using O(n7 ) arithmetic operations.
A standard sampling-to-counting reduction then yields a polynomial-time exact sampler
that generates an ω-colorable labeled chordal graph on n vertices uniformly at random.
Our counting algorithm improves upon the previous best result by Wormald (1985),
which computes the number of labeled chordal graphs on n vertices in time exponen-
tial in n. We also design two approximation algorithms for this problem: (1) an ap-
proximate counting algorithm that computes a (1 ± ε)-approximation of the number of
n-vertex labeled chordal graphs, and (2) an approximate sampling algorithm that gen-
erates a random labeled chordal graph according to a distribution whose total variation
distance from the uniform distribution is at most ε. The approximate counting algo-
rithm runs in O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)) time, and the approximate sampling algorithm runs
                                          vii
in O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)) expected time.
   Next, we turn our attention to unlabeled chordal graphs. We design an algorithm
that generates an n-vertex unlabeled chordal graph uniformly at random in expected
polynomial time. Along the way, we develop the following two results: (1) an FPT
algorithm for counting and sampling labeled chordal graphs with a given automorphism
π, parameterized by the number of moved points of π, and (2) a proof that the probability
that a random n-vertex labeled chordal graph has a given automorphism π ∈ Sn is at
               2
most 1/2c max{µ ,n} , where µ is the number of moved points of π and c is a constant. Our
algorithm for sampling unlabeled chordal graphs calls the aforementioned FPT algorithm
as a black box with potentially large values of the parameter µ, but the probability of
calling this algorithm with a large value of µ is exponentially small.
   Our third and last topic is to design FPT algorithms for counting yes-instances of
various vertex deletion problems. In particular, we describe FPT algorithms for counting
yes-instances of Vertex Cover, Cluster Vertex Deletion, Feedback Vertex
Set in Tournaments, and Split Vertex Deletion. We achieve this by designing
a general framework that reduces each of these four counting problems to a simpler
version of the problem with given deletion sets. For each of the problems in question,
we then design an FPT algorithm for the version with given deletion sets. Overall, the
algorithms for counting yes-instances of Vertex Cover, Cluster Vertex Deletion,
                                                                                   2k+o(k)
and Feedback Vertex Set in Tournaments have running time at most 23                          ·
nO(1) , and the running time of the algorithm for counting yes-instances of Split Vertex
Deletion is a triple-exponential function of k. We also design a faster algorithm for
                                                                 2
counting yes-instances of Vertex Cover that runs in time k O(k ) n3 , using ideas inspired
by the Buss kernel for that problem.




                                           viii
Contents

Curriculum Vitae                                                                         vi

Abstract                                                                                 vii

1 Introduction                                                                            1
  1.1 Counting and Sampling in a Given Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            3
  1.2 Graph Counting and Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         8
  1.3 Chordal Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
  1.4 Parameterized Graph Counting Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          17
  1.5 Notation and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     19
  1.6 Permissions and Attributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22

2 Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                        23
  2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
  2.2 Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    27
  2.3 Counting Labeled Chordal Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          28
  2.4 Implementation of the Counting Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         44
  2.5 Proof of Theorem 2 (Connected Chordal Graphs) . . . . . . . . . . . . .            44
  2.6 Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          68
  2.7 Approximate Counting and Sampling of Labeled Chordal Graphs . . . .                71
  2.8 Pseudocode for the Sampling Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          93

3 Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time 102
  3.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
  3.2 Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
  3.3 Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
  3.4 Counting Labeled Chordal Graphs with a Given Automorphism . . . . . 118
  3.5 Proofs of Theorems 6 and 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
  3.6 Bound on the Number of Labeled Chordal Graphs with Automorphism π 158



                                            ix
4 Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                       169
  4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
  4.2 Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
  4.3 Framework for Several FPT Graph Counting Algorithms . . . . . . . . . 171
  4.4 Faster Algorithm for Counting Graphs with a Small Vertex Cover . . . . 205

5 Concluding Remarks and Open Problems                                             220
  5.1 Labeled Chordal Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
  5.2 Unlabeled Chordal Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
  5.3 Yes-Instances of Parameterized Vertex Deletion Problems . . . . . . . . . 222

Bibliography                                                                         225




                                            x
Chapter 1

Introduction

In graph algorithms, the topic of counting can be interpreted in one of two ways: we can
count combinatorial objects within a given graph, or we can count the graphs themselves.
For problems of the first type, we are given a graph G as input, and the goal is to count
something in G. For instance, we could study the following problem: “Given a graph
G and an integer k, how many vertex covers of G are of size at most k?” On the other
hand, directly counting the graphs themselves leads to an equally fascinating collection of
problems. In this case, the input is the number of vertices n (and possibly an integer k),
and the goal is to count how many n-vertex graphs belong to the graph class in question.
To continue with the previous example, rather than counting small vertex covers in a
given graph, we could instead count how many graphs have a small vertex cover: “Given
integers n and k, how many n-vertex graphs have a vertex cover of size at most k?” In
this thesis, our main focus is to solve problems of the latter type, which we refer to as
graph counting.
   Sampling refers to generating random elements of a particular set or graph class. For
instance, we could output a random vertex cover of size at most k for a given graph,
or we could generate a random graph from the set of all n-vertex graphs with a vertex

                                            1
Introduction                                                                    Chapter 1


cover of size at most k. As this example suggests, for every counting problem, there is a
corresponding sampling problem. In general, if the counting problem is to compute |S|
for a set S, then the analogous sampling problem would be to output an element of S
uniformly at random. The notions of counting and sampling are closely intertwined, and
it is often possible to reduce from one to the other [1].
   In this thesis, we develop algorithms for various graph counting and graph sampling
problems. These new results are presented in Chapters 2 to 4. Each of these algorithms
has connections to parameterized algorithms, in a different sense for each chapter. The
algorithms in Chapter 2 are polynomial-time algorithms that deal with chordal graphs,
which are closely connected to treewidth, a central concept in parameterized algorithms.
The main result of Chapter 3 is an expected-polynomial-time algorithm (again having
to do with chordal graphs) that heavily relies upon a fixed-parameter tractable (FPT)
algorithm as a subroutine. In Chapter 4, all of our results are explicitly parameterized,
since we design FPT algorithms for various parameterized graph classes. The first and
simplest of these is an algorithm that counts how many n-vertex graphs have a vertex
cover of size at most k.
   Before describing these results, we begin with a survey of related work. At the
moment, there is a much more extensive body of literature on counting and sampling
combinatorial objects in a given graph [2] (e.g. vertex covers, independent sets, match-
ings, etc.) than there is on graph counting and sampling [3]. For this reason, to put our
research in context, we begin with a brief survey of the former in Section 1.1. Next, in
Section 1.2, we survey known algorithms for graph counting and sampling. Section 1.3
focuses on chordal graphs, since many of our new results are algorithms for counting and
sampling chordal graphs. In Section 1.4, we discuss results related to parameterized al-
gorithms that could be useful for future work along the lines of Chapter 4. The necessary
notation and definitions for this thesis are provided in Section 1.5.
                                             2
Introduction                                                                    Chapter 1


1.1      Counting and Sampling in a Given Graph

   An enormous amount of research has been done on the topic of counting and sampling
combinatorial objects in a given graph. In this section, we will give a brief overview of
some of the most famous problems and types of algorithms. We also discuss the method
of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), which is often used to design algorithms for
these problems, since this technique could potentially also be transferable to future work
on graph sampling. More information on the general topic of counting and sampling can
be found in the book by Jerrum [2].


1.1.1     Counting algorithms

   A natural place to begin is with #P-completeness, since many of the most famous
problems in this area are #P-complete. Here are a few examples of #P-complete counting
problems:

   • counting independent sets in a given 3-regular graph [4]

   • counting matchings in a given bipartite graph [5]

   • counting perfect matchings in a given bipartite graph [6]

   • counting 3-colorings of a given bipartite graph [7].

In the #SAT problem, we are given a Boolean formula as input, and the goal is to count
the number of variable assignments that satisfy the formula. When a problem is #P-hard,
this means that the problem is at least as hard as #SAT. (For a more formal definition,
see [2].) We say a problem belongs to the complexity class #P if it can be formulated as
counting the number of accepting paths in a polynomial-time nondeterministic Turning
machine. A problem is #P-complete if it is #P-hard and belongs to #P.

                                            3
Introduction                                                                        Chapter 1


   We do not expect there to be polynomial-time algorithms to solve these problems
exactly, since #P-complete problems are at least as difficult as NP-complete problems.
Fortunately, there is a vast body of literature on approximate counting [2]. For some
problems, it is possible to design a particularly efficient approximation algorithm known
as a fully polynomial randomized approximation scheme (FPRAS). In the context of
graph problems, an FPRAS is a randomized algorithm that takes as input a graph G
and ε, δ ∈ (0, 1] and outputs a number ẑ such that

                                Pr(e−ε ẑ ≤ z ≤ eε ẑ) ≥ 1 − δ,

where z is the exact solution for G, running in time poly(n, 1ε , log 1δ ), where n = |V (G)|.
Typically, z = |S| for an implicitly defined set S whose size is exponential in n, even
though the running time we are aiming for is polynomial in n.
   There is an FPRAS for counting perfect matchings in a given bipartite graph that
was presented by Jerrum, Sinclair, and Vigoda [8]. Around a decade earlier, Jerrum
also showed that there is an FPRAS for counting k-colorings in graphs of low enough
degree [9]. More precisely, suppose ∆ and k are nonnegative integers such that k > 2∆.
The algorithm in [9] is an FPRAS for counting k-colorings in graphs with maximum
degree ∆. Both of these algorithms use MCMC techniques (see Section 1.1.3). More
recently, the algorithm in [9] was also improved to a fully polynomal-time approximation
scheme (FPTAS), which is a deterministic algorithm (using techniques other than Markov
chains) [10].
   For the problem of counting independent sets, there is a dichotomy between graphs
with maximum degree ∆ ≤ 5 and graphs with ∆ > 5. As was shown by Chen, Liu,
and Vigoda in [11] using MCMC, there is an FPRAS for counting independent sets in
graphs with maximum degree ∆ ≤ 5 that runs in O∗ (n2 ) time, where the O∗ notation
hides polylogarithmic factors and the dependence on ε and δ. On the other hand, there
                                              4
Introduction                                                                    Chapter 1


is no FPRAS for counting independent sets in graphs with ∆ = 6 unless RP = NP [12].
    Finally, it is worth mentioning two well-known counting problems that are not #P-
complete and that have efficient exact algorithms. The number of spanning trees of a
graph can be computed in polynomial time by computing the determinant of a submatrix
of the graph’s Laplacian matrix [13]. It is also possible to count perfect matchings in a
planar graph in polynomial time by computing the square root of the determinant of a
particular matrix [14].


1.1.2      Sampling algorithms

    The sampling analogue of an FPRAS is known as a fully polynomial almost uniform
sampler (FPAUS). Let S be the set of objects that we are sampling from, and let π be the
uniform distribution over S. For example, if we are sampling independent sets in a graph
G, then S would be the set of all independent sets in G. An FPAUS is a randomized
algorithm that takes as input a graph G and δ ∈ (0, 1] and outputs W ∈ S such that
the total variation distance between π and the distribution of W is at most δ, running
in time poly(n, log 1δ ).
    Counting and sampling are closely related for all problems that are “self-reducible,”
which is a condition that holds in many cases (including for independent sets and match-
ings). Assuming self-reducibility, a counting problem admits an FPRAS if and only if
the corresponding sampling problem admits an FPAUS [1].


1.1.3      Markov chain Monte Carlo

    Markov chain Monte Carlo refers to the technique of using a Markov chain to design
a sampling algorithm. We give a brief summary of the concept of Markov chains (partly
based on [2]). For more details, see [2].

                                            5
Introduction                                                                          Chapter 1


    A discrete Markov chain with state space S is a sequence X0 , X1 , X2 , . . . of random
variables (each of which has domain S) that satisfies

          Pr(Xt+1 = x | X1 = x1 , X2 = x2 , . . . , Xt = xt ) = Pr(Xt+1 = x | Xt = xt )

for all t ≥ 0, x, x1 , . . . , xt ∈ S. The intuition is that the probability of moving to a
particular state in S at time t + 1 only depends on the current state Xt , not on what
happened further back in the past. A discrete Markov chain is time-homogenous if

                         Pr(Xt+1 = x | Xt = y) = Pr(Xt = x | Xt−1 = y)

for all t ≥ 1, x, y ∈ S. In other words, the probability of transitioning from one particular
state to another does not depend on the time t. We assume S is finite. From now on,
a discrete time-homogenous Markov chain will simply be called a Markov chain, since
these are the ones that are useful for sampling algorithms.
    A Markov chain can be described in a concise way by its transition matrix. Suppose P
is a matrix whose rows and columns are indexed by the elements of the state space S. For
x, y ∈ S, we write P (x, y) to denote the entry of P at row x and column y. Furthermore,
                                                                 P
suppose P is stochastic, i.e, P (x, y) ≥ 0 for all x, y ∈ S and y∈S P (x, y) = 1 for all
x ∈ S. The Markov chain with transition matrix P is defined as the Markov chain
X0 , X1 , X2 , . . . such that

                                 Pr(Xt+1 = x | Xt = y) = P (x, y)

for all t ≥ 0, x, y ∈ S. Of course, for the Markov chain to be fully specified, we also need
to specify the distribution of the initial state X0 . This is typically done by choosing a
fixed value x ∈ S for X0 .
    Now suppose S is a set that we would like to sample from. If we can prove that the
distribution of Xt converges to the uniform distribution on S as t approaches infinity, and
                                                6
Introduction                                                                       Chapter 1


if we have a way of simulating the Markov chain up to a sufficiently large value of t, then
this gives us a way of sampling from S approximately uniformly at random. To analyze
such an algorithm, we need to (1) prove that the distribution of Xt indeed converges to
the uniform distribution and (2) understand the running time.
   Suppose X0 , X1 , X2 , . . . is a Markov chain with transition matrix P . A stationary
distribution of this Markov chain is a probability distribution π on S that satisfies π(y) =
P
   x∈S π(x)P (x, y). This means that if Xt is distributed according to π, then so is Xt+1 .

The Markov chain is irreducible if for every x, y ∈ S, there exists a nonnegative integer t
such that P t (x, y) > 0, meaning every state can be reached from every other state. The
Markov chain is aperiodic if gcd({t : P t (x, x) > 0} = 1) for all x ∈ S. We say the Markov
chain is ergodic if it is both irreducible and aperiodic. If it is ergodic, then there exists
a unique stationary distribution π, and furthermore, P t (x, y) → π(y) as t → ∞ for all
x, y ∈ S. In many cases, it is possible to show that π is in fact the uniform distribution,
in which case step (1) is complete. For instance, a sufficient condition for this is that P
is symmetric.
   Now suppose we have been given an error bound ε > 0. For each x ∈ S, the mixing
time (with initial state x) of our Markov chain is τx (ε) := min{t : ∥P t (x, ·) − π∥TV ≤ ε}.
Here ∥P t (x, ·) − π∥TV denotes the total variation distance between row x of P t and the
stationary distribution π. The mixing time can also be considered to be independent
of the initial state, by defining τ (ε) := maxx∈S τx (ε). For (2), the mixing time tells us
how many time steps we need to simulate before we have a good approximation of the
uniform distribution.
   As an example, the FPRAS by Jerrum for counting k-colorings in graphs of low
enough degree [9] uses a relatively simple Markov chain whose state space S is the set of
all (proper) k-colorings of the input graph G. Let C := [k] be the set of k colors. The
transition probabilities are given by the following procedure:
                                             7
Introduction                                                                       Chapter 1


   1. Choose a vertex v ∈ V (G) and a color c ∈ C uniformly at random

   2. Recolor vertex v with color c; if the resulting coloring X ′ is proper, then let Xt+1 =
      X ′ , otherwise, let Xt+1 = Xt .

This Markov chain is ergodic and its stationary distribution is uniform, as long as k ≥
∆ + 2. Moreover, if we assume k > 2∆, then its mixing time is a polynomial in n. Note
that since k > ∆, it is easy to find an arbitrary k-coloring to use as the initial state.
   Markov chains have the potential to be useful for graph sampling as well. In this case,
each state in the Markov chain would be a graph rather than a subset of the vertices
of a fixed graph. For example, in [15] Sun and Bezáková proposed a Markov chain for
sampling chordal graphs. This Markov chain comes with few mixing time guarantees,
but perhaps better guarantees could be proved for this Markov chain or a variation on
it in the future.



1.2      Graph Counting and Sampling

   When counting and sampling graphs, we first need to choose whether the graphs
are labeled or unlabeled. A graph is a set V (G) of vertices together with a set E(G)
of edges. The vertex set V (G) is finite, and the edge set E(G) is a set of two-element
subsets of V (G). We write (u, v) to denote the edge {u, v}, and in general, we use
standard terminology for graphs (see Section 1.5). When a graph does not come with
any particular labeling of its vertices, we call this an unlabeled graph.
   A labeled graph is a graph in which the vertices have been assigned labels from N, the
set of natural numbers. Equivalently, we can define a labeled graph as a graph whose
vertex set is a subset of N. For simplicity, we will use this second formulation, since this
allows the labels to also serve as the names of the vertices. For example, we will speak

                                             8
Introduction                                                                       Chapter 1


of the vertex 5 ∈ V (G) rather than a vertex v with label 5. Also, will we often speak of
“labeled graphs on n vertices” as a shorthand for “labeled graphs with vertex set [n].”
   An isomorphism from a graph G to a graph H is a bijection f : V (G) → V (H) such
that for all u, v ∈ V (G), u and v are adjacent in G if and only if f (u) and f (v) are
adjacent in H. We say G and H are isomorphic if there is an isomorphism from G to
H. This is what determines equality of unlabeled graphs — two unlabeled graphs are
considered equal whenever they are isomorphic. For labeled graphs, equality is more
strict. Two labeled graphs are considered equal only when their vertex and edge sets are
precisely the same. As an example, there are only two connected unlabeled graphs on 3
vertices (a path and a triangle), but there are four connected labeled graphs on 3 vertices
(since the path can be labeled in three different ways).
   Labeled graphs are easy to count and sample, if we do not restrict to a particular
                                        n
graph class, since there are exactly 2( 2 ) labeled graphs on n vertices. To sample a
random one, just flip an unbiased coin for each of the n2 potential edges. However, the
                                                         

first polynomial-time algorithm for generating an unlabeled graph uniformly at random
was only given in 1987, by Wormald [16]. The algorithm of Wormald runs in polynomial
time in expectation, and the existence of a worst-case polynomial-time sampler of random
unlabeled graphs remains open to this day. Whether there is an expected-polynomial-
time counting algorithm for unlabeled graphs remains open as well.


1.2.1     Algorithms for various graph classes

   It often happens that we want to restrict to a particular graph class, in which case
even labeled graph counting can be nontrivial. In the rest of this section, we will survey
the known counting and sampling algorithms for various well-known graph classes. The
definitions of these graph classes (if not specified here), can be found in the cited papers.


                                             9
Introduction                                                                        Chapter 1


   Bipartite graphs. A graph is bipartite if its vertex set can be partitioned into two
(disjoint) independent sets. Counting labeled bipartite graphs is simple enough that the
algorithm has not been explicitly written in the literature, so for completeness we write
it out here. A bipartition of a bipartite graph G is a pair (L, R) such that {L, R} is a
partition of V (G) and L and R are both independent sets. We define a 2-colored labeled
bipartite graph as a labeled bipartite graph that comes with a specified bipartition. For
k, c ∈ N with c ≤ k, let f (k, c) be the number of 2-colored labeled bipartite graphs on
k vertices with exactly c components, and let g(k, c) be the number of 2-colored labeled
bipartite graphs on k vertices with at least c components. For n ∈ N, the number of
labeled bipartite graphs on n vertices is equal to
                                          n
                                          X 1
                                                    f (n, c).
                                          c =1
                                               2c

The 21c term comes from the fact that for each of the c connected components, there are
two possible colorings: the vertex with the smallest label in that component can either
belong to L or R.
   To compute the values of f , we observe that f (k, k) = g(k, k) and f (k, c) = g(k, c) −
g(k, c + 1) for all k ∈ [n], 1 ≤ c < k. The function g satisfies the recurrence
                                  k−1      
                                  X     k−1
                      g(k, c) =                     f (k ′ , 1)g(k − k ′ , c − 1)
                                  k′ =1
                                          k′ − 1

whenever c > 1. In this recurrence, k ′ is the number of vertices in the connected com-
ponent that contains the label 1. There are kk−1
                                                    
                                                ′ −1  ways of choosing the labels for that
component since it contains k ′ − 1 other labels besides the label 1. After setting aside
that component, the remaining graph has k − k ′ vertices and at least c − 1 components.
When c = 1, we have
                                              n  
                                             X   n i(n−i)
                                   g(k, 1) =       2
                                             i=0
                                                 i

                                                   10
Introduction                                                                            Chapter 1

                                                                      n
                                                                       
for all k ∈ N. Here i is the number of vertices in L. There are       i
                                                                           possible label sets for
L and 2i(n−i) possibilities for the edges between L and R.
   To compute all of these values, we begin with the base cases f (1, 1) = 1 and g(1, 1) =
1. Now suppose that for some k̂ ∈ [n], we have computed f (k, c) and g(k, c) for all
1 ≤ k < k̂, c ∈ [k]. We can use the above recurrences to compute g(k̂, c) for all c ∈ [k̂]
and then f (k̂, c) for all c ∈ [k̂]. Therefore, we can compute f (n, c) for all c ∈ [n] in O(n2 )
arithmetic operations. In [17], Wilf uses similar ideas to derive a generating function for
labeled bipartite graphs. However, the focus of [17] is on generating functions, so this
book does not give an explicit counting algorithm.
   Bipartite permutation graphs. There is a uniform sampling algorithm for con-
nected unlabeled bipartite permutation graphs by Saitoh et al. that runs in O(n) time [18].
   Chordal graphs. In Chapter 2, we design polynomial-time algorithms for counting
and sampling labeled chordal graphs, as well as faster approximate counting and ap-
proximate sampling algorithms. In Chapter 3, we design an expected-polynomial-time
algorithm for sampling unlabeled chordal graphs. See Section 1.3 for more information
about chordal graphs.
   Cluster graphs. A cluster graph is a graph in which every connected component is
a clique. The number of labeled cluster graphs on n vertices is equal to Bn , the nth Bell
number, which is defined as the number of partitions of [n]. The Bell numbers satisfy
the recurrence
                                              n  
                                              X  n
                                     Bn+1 =             Bk
                                              k=0
                                                    k
for all n ≥ 0, with the base case B0 = 1. Thus Bn can be computed in O(n2 ) time. It is
also easy to derive from this an O(n2 )-time sampling algorithm for labeled cluster graphs
on n vertices using the standard sampling-to-counting reduction of [1].
   The number of unlabeled cluster graphs on n vertices is equal to the number of


                                               11
Introduction                                                                       Chapter 1


partitions of the integer n. To compute this, let p(m, k) be the number of partitions of m
into at most k parts, for nonnegative integers m and k. Each partition of m into exactly
k parts can be converted to a partition of m − k into at most k parts by subtracting 1
from each part. This is in fact a bijection, so p(m, k) satisfies the recurrence

                            p(m, k) = p(m, k − 1) + p(m − k, k)

for all m, k ∈ N. For the base case, we have p(0, k) = 1 and p(m, 0) = 0 for all m, k ∈ N,
and p(m, k) = p(m, m) if k > m. Thus we can compute p(n, n), the number of n-
vertex unlabeled cluster graphs, in O(n2 ) time. As before, we can also derive from this
a sampling algorithm for unlabeled cluster graphs that runs in O(n2 ) time.
   Cographs. A cotree is a rooted tree whose root is labeled with the number 0 or 1.
Each cograph can be uniquely represented by a cotree whose leaves correspond to the
vertices of the cograph [19]. Because of this correspondence, known algorithms for count-
ing labeled (resp. unlabeled) rooted trees (with a given number of leaves) can be used to
compute the number of labeled (resp. unlabeled) cographs on n vertices.
   Interval graphs. Generating functions for labeled interval graphs and various sub-
classes of interval graphs are stated by Hanlon in [20], but the running time of computing
the coefficients is not explicitly stated.
   Outerplanar graphs. Bodirsky and Kang presented a polynomial-time exact count-
ing and uniform sampling algorithms for labeled outerplanar graphs in 2006 [21]. These
algorithms were also used to derive a uniform sampling algorithm for unlabeled outerpla-
nar graphs that runs in expected polynomial time [21].
   Permutation graphs. A given permutation graph has a unique representation if it is
prime in the sense that all of its modules are trivial [22]. This could perhaps be useful for
counting permutation graphs, but it is not clear whether this leads to a polynomial-time
algorithm. Such an algorithm is not explicitly written in the literature.
                                             12
Introduction                                                                    Chapter 1


   Planar graphs. Bodirsky, Gröpl, and Kang presented a polynomial-time algorithm
that uses dynamic programming to exactly compute the number of labeled planar graphs
                                                                      O(n7 ) [23].
on n vertices and generate a planar graph uniformly at random in time e
This was improved to O(n2 ) expected time by Fusy, using a Boltzmann sampler [24].
For 2-connected unlabeled planar graphs, an expected-polynomial-time uniform sampling
algorithm was presented by Bodirsky, Gröpl, and Kang in 2005 [25], followed by the same
result for connected unlabeled cubic planar graphs in 2008 [26].
   Proper interval graphs. Generating functions for labeled and unlabeled proper
interval graphs are stated by Hanlon in [20], but the running time of computing the
coefficients is not explicitly stated. However, there is an explicit formula for counting
unlabeled connected proper interval graphs given in [27]. For n ∈ N, the number of
unlabeled connected proper interval graphs on n + 1 vertices is
                                                
                             1        1  2n     n
                                            +          .
                             2       n+1 n    ⌊n/2⌋

This formula can also be used to derive a uniform sampling algorithm for unlabeled
connected proper interval graphs on n vertices. For the sampling algorithm, the running
time to output a string representation of the generated graph is O(n), and the running
time to generate the graph itself is O(n + m), where m is the number of edges in the
output graph [27].
   Split graphs. The exact number of labeled split graphs on n vertices can be com-
puted in O(n2 ) time, using the explicit formula given in [28]. In Chapter 2, we show
that a similar counting algorithm can be used to derive an approximate sampling algo-
rithm for labeled split graphs. Given n and ε, this algorithm generates a random labeled
split graph according to a distribution whose total variation distance from the uniform
distribution is at most ε, running in O(n3 log n) expected time for fixed ε.
   Threshold graphs. There is an explicit formula for the number of labeled threshold
                                            13
Introduction                                                                        Chapter 1


graphs using Eulerian numbers. For a permutation π of [n], we say position i with
1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1 is an ascent of π if π(i) < π(i + 1). For nonnegative integers n and k, the
                   n
Eulerian number    k
                       is defined as the number of permutations of [n] that have exactly k
ascents. The Eulerian numbers can be computed using the following formula from [29]:
                            Xk+1           
                           n            j n+1
                             =     (−1)        (k − j + 1)n .
                           k   j=0
                                           j

For n ≥ 2, the number of labeled threshold graphs on n vertices is
                                   n−1             
                                   X            n−1 k
                                       (n − k)        2 .
                                   k=1
                                                k−1

A combinatorial proof of this formula can be found in [30], and it can also be derived
from the generating functions in [31].
   Counting unlabeled threshold graphs is very simple. For n ∈ N, there are 2n−1
unlabeled threshold graphs on n vertices. This is because threshold graphs are defined as
the graphs that can be constructed from the empty graph by repeatedly adding either an
isolated vertex or a dominating vertex, i.e., a vertex that is adjacent to all other vertices.
For a threshold graph G with n ≥ 2 vertices, we know that G contains an isolated vertex
if and only if the last operation used to construct G was “add an isolated vertex.” We
can then undo the last operation by deleting an isolated vertex of G if one exists, and
otherwise by deleting the vertex of degree n − 1. Therefore, given G, we can reconstruct
(in reverse order) the sequence of operations used to construct G. For the first vertex that
is added to G, an isolated vertex is the same as a dominating vertex. Therefore, there
are 2n−1 distinct graphs that can be constructed by this process. To sample an n-vertex
unlabeled threshold graph uniformly at random, simply generate a random sequence of
“isolated vertex” and “dominating vertex” operations of length n − 1.
   Trees. Cayley’s formula tells us that there are exactly nn−2 labeled trees on n
vertices. A uniform sampling algorithm for labeled trees using Prüfer sequences [32] was
                                             14
Introduction                                                                     Chapter 1


discovered in 1918. We can also count the exact number of unlabeled trees on n vertices in
polynomial time [33, A000055], and there is a uniform sampling algorithm for unlabeled
trees that runs in polynomial time [34].
   Other graph classes. The problem of counting/sampling n-vertex graphs in poly-
nomial time appears to be open for the following graph classes, even when the graphs are
labeled: graphs of bounded degeneracy [35], graphs of bounded treewidth [36], chordal
bipartite graphs, distance-hereditary graphs, perfect graphs, strongly chordal graphs, and
weakly chordal graphs.


1.2.2     A word about hardness

   As mentioned above, there are many graph classes for which a polynomial-time count-
ing algorithm has not yet been discovered. Typically, as is often done for other types of
graph problems, a natural response would be to try to prove hardness (e.g., NP-hardness
or #P-hardness). However, since the input to each graph counting problem is simply
a number n (or a pair of numbers n and k), the standard hardness frameworks do not
seem amenable to this. If we were to reduce from a typical NP-complete problem such
as Vertex Cover to a graph counting problem, this would require “compressing” a
large graph of size n into a small input of size log n. To prove hardness of such problems,
it seems likely that an entirely different hardness framework would be needed, perhaps
predicated on the intractability of a particular graph counting problem. In this thesis,
all of our results are focused on designing algorithms rather than proving hardness.



1.3      Chordal Graphs

   Considering that Chapters 2 and 3 deal entirely with chordal graphs, this graph class
deserves particular attention. A graph is chordal if it does not have a cycle of length
                                            15
Introduction                                                                      Chapter 1


four or more as an induced subgraph. As an example, the graph in Figure 1.1 is chordal,
and the graph in Figure 1.2 is not. Discussions of chordal graphs in the literature go as
far back as 1958 [37]. In the early days, chordal graphs were also known as rigit circuit
graphs, rigid cycle graphs, and triangulated graphs [38, 39, 40].




       Figure 1.1: A chordal graph.          Figure 1.2: A graph that is not chordal.


   The class of chordal graphs is a fundamental graph class that is a superclass or sub-
class of many other important graph classes. All interval graphs, split graphs, threshold
graphs, strongly chordal graphs, and trivially perfect graphs are chordal. On the other
hand, chordal graphs are perfect, weakly chordal, and odd-hole-free. Chordal graphs
have close connections to treewidth, a central concept in parametrized algorithms. In
particular, a graph is chordal if and only if it has a tree decomposition in which every bag
is a clique [38, 41, 39]. An implication of this is that chordal graphs can be characterized
as the intersections graphs of subtrees of a tree [38, 41, 39]. From this point of view, it
is clear that interval graphs are chordal, since interval graphs are simply the intersection
graphs of subpaths of a path. Like interval graphs, chordal graphs can be recognized in
linear time [42, 43].
   Many NP-hard optimization problems (such as coloring [40] and maximum indepen-
dent set [44]), as well as #P-hard counting problems (such as independent sets [45, 46]),
and many others [47], are polynomial-time solvable on chordal graphs. Chordal graphs
have a wide variety of applications, including phylogeny in evolutionary biology [48, 49]
and Bayesian networks in machine learning [50]. When doing Gaussian elimination on a
symmetric matrix, the set of matrix entries that are nonzero for at least one time-point of
                                            16
Introduction                                                                      Chapter 1


the elimination process corresponds to the edge set of a chordal graph. Thus the problem
of finding an ordering in which to do Gaussian elimination that minimizes the number of
nonzero matrix entries can be reduced to finding a chordal supergraph of a given graph
with the minimum number of edges [51]. This problem, known as minimum fill-in, was
shown to be NP-complete by Yannakakis [52].
   An interesting and relevant result by Bender et al. [53] is that a random n-vertex
labeled chordal graph is a split graph with probability 1 − o(1), i.e., the fraction of
labeled chordal graphs that are not split is o(1). This suggests the possibility of a simple
approximately uniform sampler for labeled chordal graphs: simply sampling a random
labeled split graph leads to an output distribution with total variation distance o(1) from
the uniform distribution on labeled chordal graphs. This is the main inspiration behind
our approximate sampling algorithm for labeled chordal graphs in Chapter 2.



1.4      Parameterized Graph Counting Algorithms

   For a given graph class G, Vertex Deletion to G is the decision problem where
the input is a graph G and a nonnegative integer k and the goal is to decide whether
there exists a vertex subset S ⊆ V (G) of size at most k such that G \ S ∈ G. For
example, when G is the class of bipartite graphs, Vertex Deletion to G is known as
Odd Cycle Transversal. For forests and independent set graphs, the corresponding
problems are Feedback Vertex Set and Vertex Cover, respectively.
   In Chapter 4, we will design FPT algorithms for counting yes-instances of Vertex
Deletion to G for various graph classes G (including independent set graphs, clus-
ter graphs, and split graphs). These algorithms are inspired by the FPT algorithms
and kernels for the corresponding vertex deletion problems (Vertex Cover, Cluster
Vertex Deletion, and Split Vertex Deletion), parameterized by the number of

                                            17
Introduction                                                                               Chapter 1


vertices deleted. For this reason, to facilitate future work on counting yes-instances of
other vertex deletion problems, we survey what is known in terms of the kernel sizes and
FPT algorithm running times for vertex deletion to various well-known graph classes.


                  Table 1.1: For each graph class G, we state the size of the
                  best-known kernel and the running time of the fastest-
                  known FPT algorithm for Vertex Deletion to G, if
                  possible. For some graph classes, this problem is W[·]-
                  hard. The parameter k is the number of vertices deleted.

                 Graph class                 Kernel size               FPT algorithm
       Bipartite1                         k O(1) [54]             2.3146k nO(1) [55]
       Bipartite permutation              k O(1) [56]             O(9k n9 ) [57]
       Bounded degree (d)                 O(k) [58]               (d + 1)k nO(1) [59]
       Bounded degeneracy (r ≥ 2)         W[P ]-hard [60]         W[P ]-hard [60]
       Bounded treewidth                  k O(1) [61]             2O(k) n [61]
       Chordal                            O(k 12 log10 k) [62]    2O(k log k) nO(1) [63]
       Chordal bipartite                  Open                    Open
       Cluster                            O(k 5/3 ) [64]          1.811k nO(1) [65]
       Cograph2                           O(k 4 )                 3.08k nO(1) [66]
       Distance-hereditary                O(k 20 log15 k) [67]    37k nO(1) [68]
       Forest                             4k 2 [69]               3.83k nO(1) [70]
       Independent set                    2k [71]                 1.25284k nO(1) [72]
       Interval                           k O(1) [73]             8k (n + m) [74]
       Outerplanar                        O(k 4 ) [75]            2O(k) n [61]
       Perfect                            W[2]-hard [76]          W[2]-hard [76]
                                                                   Continued on next page


   1
     The polynomial kernel for bipartite graphs is randomized.
   2
     The O(k 4 ) kernel for 4-Hitting Set that uses the sunflower lemma [36] implies an O(k 4 ) kernel
for cographs, since cographs can be characterized as P4 -free graphs.
                                                    18
Introduction                                                                                 Chapter 1


                       Table 1.1 – continued from previous page
                  Graph class                Kernel size               FPT algorithm
         Permutation                      Open [56]               Open [56]
         Planar                           Open [77]               2O(k log k) n [78]
         Proper interval                  k O(1) [79]             2O(k log k) (n + m) [80]
         Split                            O(k 3 ) [81]            1.25284k k O(log k) nO(1) [82]
         Strongly chordal                 Open                    Open
         Threshold3                       O(k 4 )                 3.08k nO(1) [66]
         Trivially Perfect4               O(k 4 )                 3.08k nO(1) [66]
         Weakly chordal                   W[2]-hard [76]          W[2]-hard [76]




       In the “Kernel size” column, we have listed the bound on the number of vertices.
For example, Vertex Cover admits a kernel with at most 2k vertices. In this column,
“Open” means the existence of a polynomial kernel is open. In the “FPT algorithm”
column, “Open” means it is not known whether this problem has an FPT algorithm or is
W[1]-hard. For the bounded degeneracy graph class (i.e., graphs of degeneracy at most
r), the W[P ]-hardness result holds for r ≥ 2.



1.5        Notation and Definitions

       In Section 1.2, we defined graphs, and we discussed what it means for a graph to
be labeled or unlabeled. The graphs in those definitions are simple (no multiple edges
or self-loops) and undirected. In Chapter 4, we will also work with directed graphs. A
   3
     The O(k 4 ) kernel for 4-Hitting Set that uses the sunflower lemma [36] implies an O(k 4 ) kernel
for threshold graphs, since these graphs can be characterized as (C4 , P4 , 2K2 )-free graphs.
   4
     The O(k 4 ) kernel for 4-Hitting Set that uses the sunflower lemma [36] implies an O(k 4 ) kernel
for trivially perfect graphs, since these graphs can be characterized as (C4 , P4 )-free graphs.


                                                    19
Introduction                                                                             Chapter 1


directed graph is a set V (G) of vertices together with a set E(G) of ordered pairs of
distinct vertices called edges. As before, the vertex set V (G) is finite, and each edge is
denoted as a pair (u, v). From now on until Chapter 4, all graphs will be undirected.
   Sets and functions. Let N be the set of natural numbers {1, 2, 3, . . .}. For non-
negative integers n, we use the notation [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}. We also define [a, b] :=
{a, a + 1, . . . , b} for nonnegative integers a, b. Naturally, [0] = ∅ and [a, b] = ∅ if b < a.
   Let A = {a1 , . . . , ar } and B = {b1 , . . . , br } be finite subsets of N such that |A| = |B|,
where the elements ai and bi are listed in increasing order. We define ϕ(A, B) : A → B
as the bijection that maps ai to bi for all i ∈ [r].
   Graphs. Suppose G is a graph. We say the vertices u, v ∈ V (G) are adjacent if
(u, v) ∈ E(G), and we say the vertices u and v are incident to the edge (u, v). We also
refer to u and v as the endpoints of the edge (u, v). The neighborhood of a vertex v is
the set NG (v) := {u ∈ V (G) : (u, v) ∈ E(G)} of vertices adjacent to v, and the degree
of v is degG (v) := |NG (v)|. For a vertex subset S ⊆ V (G), the neighborhood of S is
           S
NG (S) := ( v∈S NG (v)) \ S. When the graph G is clear from the context, we omit the
subscript. For S, T ⊆ V (G), we say S sees all of T if T ⊆ N (S).
   A subgraph of G is a graph G′ such that V (G′ ) ⊆ V (G) and E(G′ ) ⊆ E(G). For
S ⊆ V (G), we write G \ S to denote the graph with vertex set V (G) \ S and edge set
{(u, v) ∈ E(G) : u, v ∈
                      / S}. An induced subgraph is a subgraph that can be written as
G′ = G \ S for some S ⊆ V (G). For a set S ⊆ V (G), G[S] denotes the induced subgraph
with vertex set S and edge set {(u, v) ∈ E(G) : u, v ∈ S}. This called the subgraph
induced by S. A clique is a set S ⊆ V (G) such that (u, v) ∈ E(G) for all u, v ∈ S, and
an independent set is a set S ⊆ V (G) such that (u, v) ∈
                                                       / E(G) for all u, v ∈ S. A set
S ⊆ V (G) is called a vertex cover if u ∈ S or v ∈ S for every edge (u, v) ∈ E(G).
   A walk is a sequence of vertices v1 , . . . , vℓ such that (vi , vi+1 ) ∈ E(G) for all 1 ≤ i < ℓ.
A path is a walk in which the vertices are all distinct, and a cycle is a walk where the first
                                                20
Introduction                                                                              Chapter 1


vertex is the same as the last but all others are distinct. The length of the path or cycle
is the number of distinct vertices. The graph G is connected if there exists a path from
u to v for every pair of vertices u, v ∈ V (G). An induced subgraph G[S] is a connected
component of G if G[S] is connected and there is no larger set Ŝ ⊋ S such that G[Ŝ] is
connected. A non-edge is a pair of distinct vertices u, v ∈ V (G) such that (u, v) ∈
                                                                                   / E(G).
    Parameterized algorithms. For the definitions of parameterized algorithms ter-
minology, including FPT algorithms, kernels, and W[1]-hardness, see [36].
    Partitions and split graphs. In this thesis, a partition of a set is defined to allow
empty parts. In particular, a partition of a set S is a collection of disjoint sets whose
union is S. A true partition is a partition in which no part is empty.
    A split graph is a graph whose vertex set can be partitioned into a clique and an
independent set, with arbitrary edges between the two parts. A split partition of a
graph G is a pair (C ′ , I ′ ) such that C ′ is a clique, I ′ is an independent set, and {C ′ , I ′ }
is a partition of V (G). In other words, this is a partition (with labeled parts) that
demonstrates that G is split. The split partition of a split graph is not unique, but it is
possible to uniquely partition V (G) into three parts in the following way.


Definition 1 Let G be a split graph. The always-clique set of G is the subset of V (G)
consisting of vertices that belong to the clique in every split partition of G. The always-
independent set of G is the set of vertices that belong to the independent set in every
split partition of G. The questioning set of G is the set of vertices v such that there
exists a split partition that places v in the clique as well as a split partition that places v
in the independent set.


    These sets will typically be denoted by C, I, and Q, respectively. As an example, if
G is a complete graph, then all of V (G) belongs to Q.


                                                 21
Introduction                                                                 Chapter 1


1.6      Permissions and Attributions

   Some of the research in this thesis has appeared in conference proceedings. We give
the details of these conference articles below.


   1. The contents of Chapter 2 are the result of a collaboration with Daniel Loksh-
      tanov and Eric Vigoda. This work appeared in the European Symposium on Algo-
      rithms (ESA 2023) [83] and is available online at https://drops.dagstuhl.de/
      entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.ESA.2023.58.

   2. The contents of Chapter 3 are the result of a collaboration with Daniel Loksh-
      tanov. This work appeared in the International Symposium on Theoretical As-
      pects of Computer Science (STACS 2025) [84] and is available online at https:
      //drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2025.46.




                                            22
Chapter 2

Counting and Sampling Labeled
Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time


2.1     Introduction

   In this chapter, we consider the problem of generating a labeled chordal graph on
n vertices uniformly at random. Despite being one of the most fundamental and well-
studied graph classes, prior to our work, the fastest uniform sampling algorithm for la-
beled chordal graphs was the exponential-time algorithm of Wormald from 1985 [85]. (To
be precise, optimizing the running time of an algorithm for counting and sampling chordal
graphs was not the main focus of Wormald; rather, the main goal was to determine the
asymptotic number of chordal graphs with given connectivity, and the exponential-time
algorithm is a corollary of these results.) Since then, various algorithmic approaches
have been proposed for generating chordal graphs (e.g., [86, 87, 15, 88, 89]), but these
algorithms do not come with any formal guarantees about their output distribution. In
particular, [87] specifically asks for the existence of a polynomial-time algorithm to sam-
ple chordal graphs uniformly at random as an open problem. In a recent abstract, Sun

                                            23
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2


and Bezáková [15] proposed a Markov chain for sampling chordal graphs, but this Markov
chain comes with few mixing time guarantees.
   We obtain the first polynomial (in n) time algorithm to exactly count the number of
labeled chordal graphs on n vertices, as well as the first polynomial-time uniform sampling
algorithm for the class of labeled chordal graphs. Our algorithm also easily extends to
counting and sampling ω-colorable labeled chordal graphs. A graph G is ω-colorable if
there exists a function c : V (G) → {1, . . . , ω} such that every edge (u, v) ∈ E(G) satisfies
c(u) ̸= c(v).


Theorem 1 There is a deterministic algorithm that given positive integers n and ω ≤ n,
computes the number of ω-colorable labeled chordal graphs on n vertices using O(n7 ) arith-
metic operations. Moreover, there is a randomized algorithm that given the same input,
generates a graph uniformly at random from the set of all ω-colorable labeled chordal
graphs on n vertices using O(n7 ) arithmetic operations.


   By the known equivalence between chromatic number, maximum clique size, and
treewidth of chordal graphs [90], Theorem 1 can be reinterpreted as counting and sam-
pling labeled chordal graphs of clique size at most ω, or treewidth at most ω − 1. The
running time bound of Theorem 1 is stated in terms of the number of arithmetic opera-
                                  2
tions. Since there are at most 2n labeled graphs on n vertices, the arithmetic operations
need to deal with n2 -bit integers. Therefore, using the O(n log n)-time algorithm for mul-
tiplying two n-bit integers [91] yields an O(n9 log n)-time upper bound for our algorithm
in the RAM model.
   A straightforward implementation of our counting algorithm gives the number of
labeled chordal graphs on up to n = 30 vertices in less than three minutes on a standard
desktop computer. Previously, the number of labeled chordal graphs was only known for
graphs on up to 15 vertices [33]. In addition, we use our implementation to compute the
                                              24
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                    Chapter 2


number of ω-colorable labeled chordal graphs for n ≤ 12 and ω ≤ 12. We chose to stop
at n = 12 to keep the table at a reasonable size, not because of the computation time.
We present these computational results in Section 2.4.
   In addition, we design two approximation algorithms: (1) an approximate count-
ing algorithm that computes a (1 ± ε)-approximation of the number of n-vertex la-
beled chordal graphs, and (2) an approximate sampling algorithm that generates a
random labeled chordal graph according to a distribution whose total variation dis-
tance from the uniform distribution is at most ε. The approximate counting algo-
rithm runs in O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)) time, and the approximate sampling algorithm runs
in O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)) expected time.


2.1.1     Methods

   Our exact counting algorithm is based on dynamic programming. While clique trees
and tree decompositions are never explicitly mentioned in the description of the algo-
rithm, the intuition behind the algorithm is based on these notions. Essentially, we
generate a rooted clique tree where the dynamic-programming table encodes certain
properties of the graph, including how it relates to the root node of the clique tree. A
clique tree of a graph G is a tree T together with a function f that maps each vertex of
G to a connected vertex subset of T , such that for every pair of vertices u, v ∈ V (G),
(u, v) is an edge in G if and only if f (u) ∩ f (v) ̸= ∅. It is well known that a graph G has
a clique tree if and only if it is chordal [90].
   The main difficulty with this approach is that different chordal graphs have different
numbers of clique trees, so if we count the total number of clique trees, this will not give
us an accurate count of the number of n-vertex chordal graphs. Therefore, the key idea
behind our algorithm is to assign to each labeled chordal graph a unique “canonical”


                                               25
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                  Chapter 2


clique tree and to only count these canonical clique trees. The information stored in
the dynamic-programming table is sufficient to ensure that every clique tree that we do
count is the canonical tree of some chordal graph, and that the canonical clique tree of
every chordal graph is counted. As it turns out, the best way to phrase our algorithm
is not in terms of clique trees at all, but rather in terms of an (essentially) equivalent
notion that we call an “evaporation sequence.” An evaporation sequence is closely related
to the standard notion of a perfect elimination ordering (PEO) of a chordal graph. A
simplicial vertex is a vertex whose neighborhood is a clique, and a PEO is an ordering
of the vertices such that each is simplicial in the current induced subgraph, if we delete
the vertices in that order (see Section 2.3.1 for more details). An evaporation sequence
is a type of “canonical” PEO: at each step, we remove all simplicial vertices from the
current subgraph, rather than making an arbitrary choice of a single simplicial vertex.
We say that all of the simplicial vertices evaporate at time 1. Next, all of the vertices
that become simplicial once the first set of simplicial vertices has been removed are said
to evaporate at time 2, and so on. It is easy to see that every labeled chordal graph has
a unique evaporation sequence, and that this sequence does not depend on the labeling
of the vertices.
    Therefore, the number of chordal graphs on n vertices is the sum over all evapora-
tion sequences of the number of labeled chordal graphs with that evaporation sequence.
While different evaporation sequences correspond to different numbers of chordal graphs,
because this number is independent of the labels, we can simply guess the number x of
vertices that evaporate at any given time, and then without loss of generality assign the
labels 1, . . . , x to those vertices.
    In our dynamic-programming algorithm, the recursive subproblems deal with counting
rooted clique trees. In this context, the root of a clique tree is the set of vertices that
evaporate last. Just as we would like to “force” a set of nodes to be in the root of the
                                            26
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                  Chapter 2


tree, we will sometimes want to force a set of nodes to evaporate last. This is done using
what we call an exception set, i.e., a set of vertices that do not evaporate even if they
are simplicial. The random sampling algorithm in Theorem 1 follows from our counting
algorithm using the standard sampling-to-counting reduction of [1].
   Our approximate counting algorithm is based on the result of Bender et al. [53] men-
tioned above, which states that almost every labeled chordal graph is a split graph. When
n is large enough (compared to a function of 1ε ), simply counting (even approximately) the
number of labeled split graphs leads to a (1 ± ε)-approximation of the number of labeled
chordal graphs. Similarly, sampling a random labeled split graph gives an approximately
uniform sampler of labeled chordal graphs.


2.1.2    Chapter overview

   Our dynamic-programming algorithm, including the associated recurrences, is pre-
sented in Section 2.3. The proof of correctness of the counting algorithm can be found
in Section 2.3.4 (here we reduce to counting connected chordal graphs) and Section 2.5
(here we establish the recurrences). In Section 2.4, one can find the tables of numbers
produced by our implementation of the counting algorithm. In Section 2.6, we describe
the details of how the sampling algorithm follows from the counting algorithm. Lastly, in
Section 2.7, we describe our approximate counting and approximate sampling algorithms.



2.2     Preliminaries

   In this chapter, we implicitly assume all graphs that we consider are labeled graphs.


Definition 2 Let G1 , G2 be two graphs, and suppose C := V (G1 ) ∩ V (G2 ) is a clique in
both G1 and G2 . When we say we glue G1 and G2 together at C to obtain G, this means

                                            27
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2


G is the union of G1 and G2 : the vertex set is V (G) = V (G1 ) ∪ V (G2 ), and the edge set
is E(G) = E(G1 ) ∪ E(G2 ).



2.3      Counting Labeled Chordal Graphs

2.3.1     The evaporation sequence

   A vertex v in a graph G is simplicial if N (v) is a clique. A perfect elimination ordering
of a graph G is an ordering v1 , . . . , vn of the vertices of G such that for all i ∈ [n], vi
is simplicial in the subgraph induced by the vertices vi , . . . , vn . It is well known that a
graph is chordal if and only if it has a perfect elimination ordering [90]. For our counting
algorithm, we define the notion of the evaporation sequence of a chordal graph, which can
be viewed as a canonical version of the perfect elimination ordering. In the evaporation
sequence, rather than making an arbitrary choice for which of the simplicial vertices in G
will go first in the ordering, we place the set of all simplicial vertices as the first item in
the sequence. As an example, if G is a tree, then the set of all simplicial vertices would
be exactly the leaves of G.
   To build the evaporation sequence, we use the fact that every chordal graph contains
a simplicial vertex [90]. This means that given a chordal graph G, if we repeatedly remove
all simplicial vertices, then eventually no vertices remain. By observing at which time
step each vertex is deleted, we obtain a partition of V (G), which allows us to classify
and understand the structure of G. In our algorithm, it will also be useful to set aside a
set of exceptional vertices which are never deleted, even if they are simplical.
   To formalize this, suppose we are given a chordal graph G and a clique X ⊆ V (G).
We define the evaporation sequence of G with exception set X as follows: If X = V (G),
then the evaporation sequence of G is the empty sequence. If X ⊊ V (G), then let L
                                                                                 e1


                                              28
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2

                                                         e1 \ X. Suppose L2 , . . . , Lt is
be the set of all simplicial vertices in G, and let L1 = L
the evaporation sequence of G \ L1 (with exception set X). Then L1 , L2 , . . . , Lt is the
evaporation sequence of G.
                                                           e1 \ X is nonempty whenever
   To see that this is well-defined, we need to check that L
X ⊊ V (G), to ensure that we eventually reach the base case X = V (G). This follows
from the fact that every chordal graph that is not a complete graph contains two non-
                                           e1 \ X = ∅. This means L
adjacent simplicial vertices [90]. Suppose L                      e1 is a clique since X

is a clique, so G does not contain any non-adjacent simplicial vertices. Thus G must be
                                e1 ⊆ X implies X = V (G). Therefore, we always reach
a complete graph, in which case L
the base case X = V (G).
   If the evaporation sequence L1 , L2 , . . . , Lt of G has length t, then we say G evaporates
at time t with exception set X, and t is called the evaporation time. We define LG (X) :=
Lt to be the last set in the evaporation sequence of G, and we let LG (X) = ∅ if the
sequence is empty. Similarly, we define the evaporation time of a vertex subset. Suppose
G has evaporation sequence L1 , L2 , . . . , Lt with exception set X, and suppose S ⊆ V (G)\
X is a nonempty vertex subset. Let tS be the largest index i such that Li ∩ S ̸= ∅. We
say S evaporates at time tS in G with exception set X.


2.3.2     Setup for the counting algorithm

   Given positive integers n and ω, we wish to count the number of ω-colorable chordal
graphs on n vertices. This can easily be reduced to the problem of counting connected ω-
colorable chordal graphs on at most n vertices (see Lemma 10 in Section 2.3.4). Therefore,
our main focus is to describe the following algorithm:


Theorem 2 There is an algorithm that given n ∈ N, computes the number of ω-colorable
labeled connected chordal graphs with vertex set [n] using O(n7 ) arithmetic operations.

                                             29
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2


   We first give an overview of this algorithm and the various dynamic-programming
tables (Definition 3). Next, we describe the recurrences in detail in Section 2.3.3. In
Section 2.3.4, we show that the counting portion of Theorem 1 (counting chordal graphs)
follows from Theorem 2 (counting connected chordal graphs). In Section 2.5, we prove
correctness of the recurrences and complete the proof of Theorem 2.

   Algorithm overview. To count ω-colorable connected chordal graphs G, we classify
these graphs based on the behavior of their evaporation sequence. We make use of several
counter functions (these are our dynamic-programming tables), each of which keeps track
of the number of chordal graphs in a particular subclass. The arguments of the counter
functions tell us the number of vertices in the graph, the evaporation time, the size of
the exception set X, the size of the last set of simplicial vertices LG (X), etc. Initially, we
consider all possibilities for the evaporation time of G with exception set X = ∅. Then,
using several of our recursive formulas, we reduce the number of vertices by dividing
up the graph into smaller subgraphs and counting the number of possibilities for each
subgraph. As we do so, the exception set X increases in size. When we consider these
various subgraphs, we also make sure that in each subgraph, the maximum clique size is
at most ω. In the end, the algorithm understands the possibilities for the entire graph,
including the cliques that make up the very first set in its evaporation sequence.
   The purpose of the exception set is to allow us to restrict to smaller subgraphs without
distorting the evaporation behavior of the graph. For example, suppose we wish to count
the number of connected chordal graphs on n vertices that evaporate at time t, such
that the vertices 1, 2, . . . , ℓ make up the last set to evaporate, i.e., LG (∅) = [ℓ]. Let
L = [ℓ]. One subproblem of interest would be to count the number of possibilities for the
first connected component of G \ L. Formally, we count the number of possibilities for
G′ := G[L ∪ C], where C is the connected component of G \ L that contains the vertex


                                              30
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                     Chapter 2


ℓ + 1. For each possible number of vertices in G′ , we make a recursive call to count the
number of possible subgraphs G′ of that size. However, if we were to restrict to G′ with a
still-empty exception set, then the evaporation time of G′ alone could be much less than
the evaporation time of V (G′ ) in G. Indeed, there may be vertices in G \ G′ adjacent to
L that prevent L from evaporating before time t, so when we restrict to the subgraph G′ ,
L would now evaporate too soon. This would cause a cascading effect, causing vertices
near L to evaporate as well, and changing the entire evaporation sequence of G′ . To
resolve this, we add the vertices of L to the exception set to preserve the evaporation
behavior of G′ .
   The list of counter functions is given in Definition 3; see Figure 2.1 for an illustration.
In the figure, an arrow from one function to another, say from g̃ to g, indicates that the
definition of g̃ is the same as that of g except where indicated otherwise. As shown below,
the number of ω-colorable connected chordal graphs on n vertices is the sum of various
calls to the fourth function g̃1 , since g̃1 (t, 0, n) is the number of ω-colorable connected
chordal graphs on n vertices that evaporate at time t with empty exception set.
   To remember the names of these counter functions, one can think of them as follows.
The g-functions keep track of the size of the exception set X, but these do not have
information about the size of LG (X). The f -functions have an additional argument ℓ,
which is the size of LG (X). As a mnemonic, one can say that g stands for “glued” and
f stands for “free.” In the g-functions, X is the “root,” and all of the vertices of X are
glued, in the sense that they cannot evaporate. In the f -functions, X ∪ LG (X) is the
“root,” and some of the vertices in the root are free, since the vertices in LG (X) are
allowed to evaporate. For functions with a tilde, the connected components of G \ X (for
g-functions) or G\(X ∪L(G, X)) (for f -functions) all evaporate at the same time. Lastly,
a subscript p means that the neighborhoods of the connected components of G \ X (or
G \ (X ∪ L(G, X))), when intersected with X (or X ∪ L(G, X)), are proper subsets of X
                                             31
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                        Chapter 2


(or X ∪L(G, X)). For all of these functions, we only consider graphs that are ω-colorable.


Definition 3 The following functions count various subclasses of chordal graphs. The
arguments t, x, ℓ, k, z are nonnegative integers. They take on values up to at most n and
satisfy the domain requirements listed below.

  1. g(t, x, k, z) is the number of ω-colorable connected chordal graphs G with vertex set
     [x + k] that evaporate in time at most t with exception set X := [x], where X is a
     clique, with the following property: every connected component of G \ X (if any)
     has at least one neighbor in X \ [z]. Domain: t ≥ 0, x ≥ 1, z < x.

  2. g̃(t, x, k, z) is the same as g(t, x, k, z), except every connected component of G \ X
     (if any) evaporates at time exactly t in G. Note: A graph with V (G) = X would be
     counted because in that case, g̃ is the same as g. Domain: t ≥ 1, x ≥ 1, z < x.

  3. g̃p (t, x, k, z) is the same as g̃(t, x, k, z), except no connected component of G \ X
     sees all of X. Domain: t ≥ 1, x ≥ 1, z < x.

  4. g̃1 (t, x, k) and g̃≥2 (t, x, k) are the same as g̃(t, x, k, z), except every connected com-
     ponent of G \ X sees all of X (hence we no longer require every component of G \ X
     to have a neighbor in X \ [z]), and furthermore, for g̃1 we require that G \ X has
     exactly one connected component, and for g̃≥2 we require that G \ X has at least
     two components. Domain for g̃1 : t ≥ 1, x ≥ 0. Domain for g̃≥2 : t ≥ 1, x ≥ 1.

  5. f (t, x, ℓ, k) is the number of ω-colorable connected chordal graphs G with vertex set
     [x + ℓ + k] that evaporate at time exactly t with exception set X := [x], such that
     G \ X is connected, LG (X) = [x + 1, x + ℓ], and X ∪ LG (X) is a clique. Domain:
     t ≥ 1, x ≥ 0, ℓ ≥ 1.



                                              32
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                        Chapter 2


  6. f˜(t, x, ℓ, k) is the same as f (t, x, ℓ, k), except every connected component of G\(X ∪
      LG (X)) evaporates at time exactly t − 1 in G, and there exists at least one such
      component, i.e., X ∪ LG (X) ⊊ V (G). Domain: t ≥ 2, x ≥ 0, ℓ ≥ 1.

  7. f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k) is the same as f˜(t, x, ℓ, k), except no connected component of G \ (X ∪
      LG (X)) sees all of X ∪ LG (X). Domain: t ≥ 2, x ≥ 0, ℓ ≥ 1.

  8. f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z) is the same as f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k), except rather than requiring that G \ X
      is connected, we require that G \ [z] is connected. Domain: t ≥ 2, x ≥ 0, ℓ ≥ 1,
      z ≤ x.



2.3.3     Recurrences for the counting algorithm

   We implicitly assume all graphs in this section are connected and ω-colorable. For
k ∈ N, let c(k) denote the number of ω-colorable connected chordal graphs with vertex set
[k]. To compute c(n), we first consider all possibilities for the evaporation time. Initially,
the exception set is empty. We observe that g̃1 (t, 0, n) is the number of (connected,
ω-colorable) chordal graphs with vertex set [n] that evaporate at time exactly t with
empty exception set. Therefore,
                                             n
                                             X
                                    c(n) =         g̃1 (t, 0, n).
                                             t=1

We compute the necessary values of g̃1 by evaluating the following recurrences top-down
using memoization. We take this approach rather than bottom-up dynamic programming
to simplify the description slightly, since by memoizing we do not need to specify in what
order the entries of the various dynamic-programming tables are computed. We simply
compute each value of the counter functions as needed. For the following recurrences, let
X = [x] according to the current value of the argument x, and let L = LG (X).

                                              33
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                                               Chapter 2



                𝑔                                                         𝑓
                                                   𝑋 =𝑥                                                        𝑋 =𝑥
                                           𝑋                                                   𝑋
                                   𝑍               𝑍 =𝑧                                                        𝐿 =ℓ
                                                                                               𝐿

                                                      }      𝑘
                                                          vertices
                                                                                                              }       𝑘
                                                                                                                   vertices
                •     evaporates at time ≤ 𝑡
                •     each component has a neighbor in 𝑋 ∖ 𝑍              •         evaporates at time exactly 𝑡




                𝑔*                                                        𝑓+
                                                                                                   𝑋
                                       𝑍       𝑋
                                                                                                   𝐿



                      •       each component evaporates
                              at time exactly 𝑡                                 •        each component evaporates
                                                                                         at time exactly 𝑡 − 1




                𝑔*!                                                       𝑓+!
                                                                                                    𝑋
                                       𝑍       𝑋
                                                                                                        𝐿



                          •    each component has a                                  •     each component has a
                               non-neighbor in 𝑋                                           non-neighbor in 𝑋 ∪ 𝐿




                𝑔*"                                                             𝑔*#$
                                           𝑋                                                        𝑋




                      •       𝐺 ∖ 𝑋 has exactly one component             •         𝐺 ∖ 𝑋 has at least two components
                      •       this component sees all of 𝑋                •         each component sees all of 𝑋




               Figure 2.1: The counter functions. Here L = LG (X) and
               Z = [z]. The drawing of f˜p represents f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k).

                                                                     34
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2


   To compute g̃1 (t, 0, n), the number of chordal graphs that evaporate at time exactly t,
we consider all possibilities for the size ℓ of L. Once ℓ is given, there are nℓ possibilities
                                                                                

for the label set of L. Recall that f counts the number of chordal graphs where L is
fixed and evaporates at time t, and G \ X is connected. Formally, we have the following
recurrence — the first time this is used, the arguments are t, x = 0, and k = n.


Lemma 1 For g̃1 , we have
                                             k  
                                            X   k
                            g̃1 (t, x, k) =       f (t, x, ℓ, k − ℓ).
                                            ℓ=1
                                                ℓ

   The proof of Lemma 1, along with the proofs of all of the following recurrences, can
be found in Section 2.5.3. We proceed in this order, first presenting the recurrences and
later presenting their proofs, to first give the reader the context of the entire algorithm.
For now, to see the intuition behind Lemma 1, recall that in the definition of f (t, x, ℓ, k)
we require a specific label set for LG (X), namely [x + 1, x + ℓ]. If we were to replace
that requirement with LG (X) = L′ for any other subset L′ of [x + 1, x + ℓ + k] of size
ℓ, this would not change the value of f (t, x, ℓ, k). Therefore, in the recurrence for g̃1 , it
is sufficient to compute f (t, x, ℓ, k − ℓ) and multiply by kℓ , rather than computing kℓ
                                                                                             

distinct counter functions.
   For f , to count chordal graphs where L is fixed and evaporates at time t, and G \ X
is connected, we consider all possibilities for the set of labels that appear in connected
components of G \ (X ∪ L) that evaporate at time exactly t − 1. Recall that f˜ is the
same as f , except all components of G \ (X ∪ L) evaporate at time exactly t − 1. For
each possible k ′ (the size of the chosen label set), f˜ allows us to count the number of
possibilities for the subgraph G1 consisting of X ∪ L and all components of G \ (X ∪ L)
that evaporate at time exactly t − 1. The function g allows us to count the number of
possibilities for the subgraph G2 consisting of X ∪ L and all other components.

                                               35
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                            Chapter 2


Lemma 2 For f , we have
                                  k  
                                X     k ˜
               f (t, x, ℓ, k) =         ′
                                          f (t, x, ℓ, k ′ )g(t − 2, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x).
                                k′ =1
                                      k

   When f is called for the first time in the initial steps of the algorithm, this is the first
moment when X becomes nonempty (when we call the function g), since at this point
we are restricting to a subgraph with fewer than n vertices. When we restrict to the
subgraph G2 , we want to ensure that its vertices have the same evaporation behavior as
they did in G. In particular, we need to ensure that the vertices of L do not evaporate too
soon, since their presence may be essential for preventing other vertices from evaporating.
For this reason, we let X ∪ L be the exception set for G2 . For G1 , the exception set is
simply X because the components that evaporate at time exactly t − 1 are still present
in G1 , preventing the vertices of L from evaporating before time t.
   For the subgraph G2 , now that all of L has been pushed into the exception set, we
no longer have information about the argument ℓ since the last set of simplicial vertices
in G2 evaporates further back in time. This is why we call g rather than f to count the
possibilities for G2 . In fact, G2 \ [x + ℓ] might not even be connected, which is required
by f . Finally, the fourth argument of g indicates that every connected component of
G2 \ (X ∪ L) has at least one neighbor in L. This ensures that G \ X is connected.
   For g, to count chordal graphs that evaporate in time at most t, we consider all
possibilities for the set of labels that appear in connected components of G \ X that
evaporate at time exactly t. Recall that g̃ counts the number of chordal graphs where all
connected components of G \ X evaporate at time exactly t.


Lemma 3 For g, we have
                                   k  
                                 X     k
                 g(t, x, k, z) =         ′
                                           g̃(t, x, k ′ , z)g(t − 1, x, k − k ′ , z).
                                 k′ =0
                                       k

                                                  36
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                   Chapter 2


   For g̃, to count chordal graphs where all connected components of G \ X evaporate at
time exactly t, we consider all possibilities for the label set of the component C of G \ X
that contains the lowest label not in X (namely x + 1). We also consider all possibilities
for N (C). In this recurrence, k ′ stands for |C|, and x′ stands for |N (C)|.


Lemma 4 For g̃, we have
                          k X
                            x                       
                          X     x               z     k−1
       g̃(t, x, k, z) =                      −               g̃1 (t, x′ , k ′ )g̃(t, x, k − k ′ , z).
                          k′ =1 x′ =1
                                        x′      x′   k′ − 1

   The constraint x′ ≥ 1 ensures that G is connected. We subtract all ways of selecting
x′ elements from [z] to ensure that N (C) is not contained in [z]. We also subtract 1 in
the binomial coefficient kk−1
                               
                           ′ −1  because the label set for C always contains x + 1, along
with k ′ − 1 other labels.
   For f˜, we need to count chordal graphs where L is fixed and evaporates at time t,
G \ X is connected, and all connected components of G \ (X ∪ L) evaporate at time
exactly t − 1. The number of such graphs in which no component of G \ (X ∪ L) sees
all of X ∪ L is f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k), by the definition of f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k). Now if there is at least
one all-seeing component, then we break this down into two further cases: either exactly
one component sees all of X ∪ L, or at least two components see all of X ∪ L. Recall
that g̃1 (resp. g̃≥2 ) counts the number of chordal graphs where all components of G \ X
evaporate at time exactly t, every component sees all of X, and there is exactly one
such component (resp. at least two such components). In the first (resp. second) case, g̃1
(resp. g̃≥2 ) corresponds to the all-seeing component(s), and f˜p (resp. g̃p ) corresponds to
the remaining components.




                                                     37
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                           Chapter 2


Lemma 5 For f˜, we have
                                               k  
                                               X  k
         f˜(t, x, ℓ, k) = f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k) +                g̃1 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ )f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k − k ′ )
                                               k′ =1
                                                       k′
                              k        
                              X       k
                          +              g̃≥2 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ )g̃p (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x).
                              k′ =1
                                      k′

   The above cases are relevant because if at least two components of G \ (X ∪ L) see
all of X ∪ L, then this prevents the vertices of L from evaporating before time t. Indeed,
each vertex u ∈ L has a neighbor in each of those two components, meaning u has two
non-adjacent neighbors. Otherwise, if there is at most one such component, then the
neighborhoods of the remaining components of G \ (X ∪ L) must together cover L to
ensure that L does not evaporate until time t. In that case, for each vertex u ∈ L that
is covered by a proper-subset neighborhood N (C) of a component C, u has a neighbor
v ∈ C as well as a neighbor w ∈ (X ∪ L) \ N (C), and v and w are non-adjacent.
   The reason we require G \ X to be connected in the definition of f (rather than just
requiring G to be connected) can be seen from the recurrence for f˜. Since in the first
sum over k ′ we only wish to consider graphs with exactly one all-seeing component, in
the definition of g̃1 we require G \ X to be connected. The recurrence for g̃1 depends
on f , so this carries over into requiring G \ X to be connected in the definition of f .
This explains the need for the argument z (for example, in g): as was mentioned above
when we discussed the recurrence for f , keeping track of z lets us ensure that G \ X is
connected in all graphs counted by f .
   For g̃≥2 , to count chordal graphs where all connected components of G\X evaporate at
time exactly t, every component sees all of X, and there are at least two such components,
we consider all possibilities for the label set of the component that contains the lowest
label not in X. For the remaining components, there is either exactly one of them or at
least two.

                                                       38
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                            Chapter 2


Lemma 6 For g̃≥2 , we have
                            k−1      
                            X     k−1                                                                     
        g̃≥2 (t, x, k) =                      g̃1 (t, x, k ′ ) g̃1 (t, x, k − k ′ ) + g̃≥2 (t, x, k − k ′ ) .
                            k′ =1
                                    k′ − 1

   For g̃p , to count chordal graphs where all connected components of G \ X evaporate
at time exactly t and no component sees all of X, we proceed as we did for g̃, except we
require x′ < x rather than x′ ≤ x.


Lemma 7 For g̃p , we have
                           k X
                             x−1                      
                           X       x              z     k−1
      g̃p (t, x, k, z) =                       −               g̃1 (t, x′ , k ′ )g̃p (t, x, k − k ′ , z).
                           k′ =1 x′ =1
                                         x′       x′   k′ − 1

   For f˜p , we need to count chordal graphs where L is fixed and evaporates at time t, all
connected components of G \ (X ∪ L) evaporate at time exactly t − 1, and no component
sees all of X ∪ L. We first observe that when z = x, requiring G \ [z] to be connected is
the same as requiring G \ X to be connected.


Lemma 8 We have f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k) = f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, x).


   The next recurrence for f˜p counts the number of such graphs in which G \ [z] is
connected. On the first reading, one can skip the two “otherwise” cases in Lemma 9.
In this lemma, we consider all possibilities for the label set of the component C of
G \ (X ∪ L) that contains the lowest label not in X ∪ L. In the outer sum, k ′ stands for
|C|. Additionally, we consider all possibilities for the size x′ of N (C) ∩ X and the size
ℓ′ of N (C) ∩ L, and we consider all possibilities for their respective label sets. If ℓ′ > 0,
then N (C) is automatically not contained in [z] since z ≤ x, so there are xx′ possible
                                                                                   

label sets for N (C) ∩ X.
  The intuition behind the two “otherwise” cases is as follows. If ℓ′ = 0, then we
must subtract xz′ from the number of possible label sets for N (C) ∩ X to ensure that
                 

                                                         39
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                                Chapter 2


N (C) ̸⊆ [z]. If ℓ′ = ℓ, then all of the vertices of L have now been pushed into the exception
set, so the evaporation time of the subgraph formed from the remaining components is
t − 1. In this case, we call g̃p since we no longer know the size of the last set of simplicial
vertices.
    The dot in front of each of the curly braces denotes multiplication. For example, if
ℓ′ > 0, then we multiply by xx′ .
                               


Lemma 9 For f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z), we have

f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z) =
                                                                         
                                                                          x                   if ℓ′ > 0
                                                                            
k                                                                    
X           X               k−1      ℓ               ′     ′     ′       x′
                                       g̃ 1 (t − 1, x  + ℓ   , k   ) ·
                            k ′ − 1 ℓ′
                                                                        x′ −         z
                                                                                         
k′ =1     0≤x′ ≤x                                                                             otherwise
          0≤ℓ′ ≤ℓ                                                            x        x′
        0<x′ +ℓ′ <x+ℓ
                                                                      
                                                                      f˜p (t, x + ℓ′ , ℓ − ℓ′ , k − k ′ , z) if ℓ′ < ℓ
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                  ·
                                                                      g̃p (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , z)
                                                                      
                                                                                                            otherwise.

    The base cases are as follows. We reach the base case for g when t = 0:
                                               
                                               
                                               1 if k = 0
                                               
                               g(0, x, k, z) =
                                               
                                               0 if k > 0.
                                               

For g̃ and g̃p , we have g̃(t, x, 0, z) = 1 and g̃p (t, x, 0, z) = 1 when k = 0. For, g̃1 we
observe that g̃1 (t, x, k) = 0 if t = 0 or k = 0. Similarly, for g̃≥2 we have g̃≥2 (t, x, k) = 0
if t = 0 or k = 0. We reach the base case for f when x + ℓ > ω, t = 1, or k = 0. If
x + ℓ > ω, then f (t, x, ℓ, k) = 0. Remarkably, this is the only place where ω appears in
the algorithm. If x + ℓ ≤ ω, then we have
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             1
                                                                        if k = 0
                                          f (1, x, ℓ, k) =
                                                             
                                                             0
                                                                        otherwise.
                                                             40
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                          Chapter 2


If x + ℓ ≤ ω and t ≥ 2, then f (t, x, ℓ, 0) = 0. For f˜, we have f˜(t, x, ℓ, k) = 0 if t = 1 or
k = 0. Similarly, for f˜p we have f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z) = 0 if t = 1 or k = 0. For the version of f˜p
without the fifth argument z, we do not need a base case since we always immediately
call f˜p with z.
    The control flow formed by these recurrences is shown in Figure 2.2. The algorithm
terminates because either the value of t or the number of vertices in the graph (i.e., x + k
or x + ℓ + k) decreases each time we return to the same function. For the running time,
note that we first compute all of the necessary binomial coefficients. In particular, we
compute all values of ab such that 0 ≤ a ≤ n and 0 ≤ b ≤ a, which can be done using
                        

O(n2 ) arithmetic operations. Next, when computing the counter functions, the running
time is dominated by the arithmetic operations needed to compute f˜p . The recurrence for
f˜p involves a triple summation, and there are five arguments, so a naive implementation
uses O(n8 ) arithmetic operations. However, in Section 2.5.4, we show that the running
time can in fact be improved to O(n7 ) arithmetic operations.


2.3.4      Proof of Theorem 1 (counting)

    In this section, we prove the counting portion of Theorem 1 using Theorem 2. (See
Section 2.6 for the proof of the sampling portion of Theorem 1.) In other words, we
describe an algorithm to count chordal graphs, assuming we have an algorithm to count
connected chordal graphs. Theorem 2 — counting connected chordal graphs — is proved
in Section 2.5.
    For k ∈ N, let a(k) denote the number of ω-colorable chordal graphs with vertex set
[k]. Recall that c(k) is the number of ω-colorable connected chordal graphs with vertex
set [k].




                                                41
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time               Chapter 2




                      𝑓%$       𝑔
                                !$        𝑔!
                                           "#       𝑔
                                                    !!            𝑔&




                                𝑓$                   𝑓             𝑔




               Figure 2.2: The control flow of the counting algorithm.
               An arrow from f to g indicates that the recursive formula
               for f depends on g. The arrow is red (and dashed) if t
               decreases by 1, blue (and dashed) if t decreases by 2, and
               black if t does not change. The black self-loops do not
               cause an infinite loop because in those recursive calls, the
               number of vertices decreases.




                                            42
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                     Chapter 2


Lemma 10 The number of ω-colorable chordal graphs with vertex set [n] is given by
                                      n     
                                      X   n−1
                             a(n) =                c(k)a(n − k)
                                      k=1
                                            k−1

for all n ∈ N.


    Proof: Suppose G is an ω-colorable chordal graph with vertex set [n]. Let G1 be
the graph formed by the connected component of G that contains the label 1, and let G2
be the graph formed by all other connected components of G (which can potentially be
empty). Let C be the set of labels that appear in G1 , let k = |C|, and let D = [n] \ C,
i.e., D is the set of labels that appear in G2 . Now relabel G1 by applying ϕ(C, [k]) to
the labels in C, and relabel G2 by applying ϕ(D, [n − k]) to the labels in D. (Recall that
ϕ(A, B) is defined at the end of Section 1.5.) We can see that G1 is now a connected
ω-colorable chordal graph with vertex set [k], and G2 is an ω-colorable chordal graph
with vertex set [n − k]. The map that takes any chordal graph G to the resulting pair
(G1 , G2 ) is injective since ϕ(C, [k]) and ϕ(D, [n − k]) are both bijections. Therefore, a(n)
is at most the number of possible triples (G1 , G2 , C), which is given by the summation
above.
   To see that a(n) is bounded below by the same summation, suppose we are given
1 ≤ k ≤ n, a connected ω-colorable chordal graph G1 with vertex set [k], an ω-colorable
chordal graph G2 with vertex set [n − k], and a subset C ⊆ [n] of size k that contains
1. Let D = [n] \ C. We construct an ω-colorable chordal graph G with vertex set [n]
as follows: Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([k], C) to its label set, and relabel G2 by applying
ϕ([n−k], D) to its label set. Now let G be the union of G1 and G2 (by taking the union of
the vertex sets and the edge sets). Clearly G is an ω-colorable chordal graph with vertex
set [n]. The map that takes the triple (G1 , G2 , C) to the resulting graph G is injective,
so a(n) is at least the summation above, as desired.

                                             43
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                           Chapter 2


       Lemma 10 directly gives a dynamic-programming algorithm to compute the number
of ω-colorable chordal graphs with vertex set [n], given n as input. First, we compute
all of the necessary binomial coefficients, i.e., all values of ab such that 0 ≤ a ≤ n and
                                                                  

0 ≤ b ≤ a, which can be done using O(n2 ) arithmetic operations. Next, by Theorem 2, we
can compute c(k) for all k ∈ [n] at a cost of O(n7 ) arithmetic operations. (Technically,
the algorithm of Theorem 2 just computes c(n), but by reusing the same dynamic-
programming tables from that algorithm, we can also compute c(k) for all k ∈ [n].)
To compute a(n), we use the recurrence in Lemma 10 at a cost of O(n2 ) arithmetic
operations. For the base case, we observe that a(0) = 1. Therefore, we have an algorithm
to count ω-colorable chordal graphs on n vertices using O(n7 ) arithmetic operations.



2.4         Implementation of the Counting Algorithm

       An implementation of the counting algorithm in C++ can be successfully run for inputs
as large as n = 30 in about 2.5 minutes on a standard desktop computer.1 Previously,
the number of labeled chordal graphs was only known up to n = 15. Table 2.1 shows the
number of connected chordal graphs on n vertices for n ≤ 30, with the chromatic number
unrestricted. Table 2.2 shows the number of ω-colorable connected chordal graphs on n
vertices for various values of n and ω.2



2.5         Proof of Theorem 2 (Connected Chordal Graphs)

       In this section, we prove correctness of the recurrences presented in Section 2.3.3,
in order to prove Theorem 2. Sections 2.5.1 and 2.5.2 contain a number of lemmas on
   1
    Our implementation is available on GitHub at https://github.com/uhebertj/chordal.
   2
    These tables were made using the version of the algorithm that uses O(n8 ) arithmetic operations,
without the optimization using the function h, since this version ran fastest in practice.


                                                 44
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                 Chapter 2

               Table 2.1: Numbers of labeled connected chordal graphs
               on n vertices
                                                                              c(n)    n
                                                                                 1    1
                                                                                 1    2
                                                                                 4    3
                                                                                35    4
                                                                               541    5
                                                                             13302    6
                                                                            489287    7
                                                                          25864897    8
                                                                        1910753782    9
                                                                      193328835393   10
                                                                    26404671468121   11
                                                                  4818917841228328   12
                                                               1167442027829857677   13
                                                             374059462390709800421   14
                                                          158311620026439080777076   15
                                                        88561607724193506845709239   16
                                                     65629642803250494352023169033   17
                                                  64646285130595946195244365518454   18
                                               84997214469704246545711429635276299   19
                                           149881423568752945444616261913109046421   20
                                        356260551239284266908724943672911100488558   21
                                    1147374494946449194450825817605340123679150461   22
                                 5032486852040265322461550844695939678052967384053   23
                             30210545039307528599583618386687349227933725131035504   24
                         249400383130659050580193267861459579254489822650065685961   25
                     2844134548699568981561554629043146070324332400944867482340313   26
                 44993294034522185332489548856700572371349354518671249097245374660   27
             991277251392360301443460288397009109066708275778086061470009877027739   28
        30526157144572224953157514915475479605501638476250575941226904780179348933   29
   1318363800739595427128835554231270770209426196402736248743162258824492158995254   30


chordal graphs and their evaporation sequences. In Section 2.5.3, we use these lemmas
to prove the recurrences. We then discuss the running time in Section 2.5.4.


2.5.1    Chordal graph properties

   We make use of the following standard facts about chordal graphs. The proof of
Lemma 11 can be found in [90].


Lemma 11 Every chordal graph contains a simplicial vertex.
                                            45
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                     Chapter 2

                    Table 2.2: Numbers of ω-colorable labeled connected
                    chordal graphs on n vertices. When ω = 2, the algorithm
                    counts labeled trees.

                                             n
          2     3      4    5       6        7             8             9
          1     3 16 125 1296 16807     262144    4782969                     2
                4 34 480 9831 268093 9185436 379623492                        3
                  35 540 13136 466683 22732032 1437072780                     4
                     541 13301 488873 25736782 1873146621                     5
                                                                                ω
                         13302 489286 25863916 1910084529                     6
                               489287 25864896 1910751531                     7
                                      25864897 1910753781                     8
                                               1910753782                     9
                                    n
                            10               11                    12
                 100000000           2357947691            61917364224        2
               18376225525        1019282908941         63707908718994        3
              112588153700       10535042533301       1144261607209084        4
              181962472490       22726623077466       3513611793935959        5
              192919501307       26158547399061       4666697716137194        6
              193325509217       26400465973728       4813890013657154        7 ω
              193328830337       26404655450778       4818876084111431        8
              193328835392       26404671456933       4818917765689886        9
              193328835393       26404671468120       4818917841203841       10
                                 26404671468121       4818917841228327       11
                                                      4818917841228328       12


Lemma 12 Let G1 , G2 be two chordal graphs, and suppose Y := V (G1 ) ∩ V (G2 ) is a
clique in both G1 and G2 . If we glue G1 and G2 together at Y , then the resulting graph
G is chordal.


    Proof: Suppose G contains an induced cycle C of length at least 4. Since G1 and
G2 are chordal, C contains some vertex u ∈ V (G1 ) \ Y and some v ∈ V (G2 ) \ Y . There
are no edges connecting G1 \ Y to G2 \ Y , so C contains two non-adjacent vertices that
belong to the clique Y , which is a contradiction.

                                                 46
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                         Chapter 2


2.5.2     Properties of the evaporation sequence

Basic properties

   In this section (Section 2.5.2), suppose G is a chordal graph that evaporates at time t
with exception set X, where X ⊆ V (G) is a clique, and let L1 , . . . , Lt be the evaporation
sequence. For i ∈ [t], let Gi be the state of the graph G just before time step i. In other
words, G1 = G and Gi = G \ (L1 ∪ · · · ∪ Li−1 ) for all i ∈ [t].


Observation 1 For all i ∈ [t], every connected component of G[Li ] is a clique.


     Proof: Let i ∈ [t], and suppose u and v are two vertices that belong to the same
connected component in G[Li ]. We have some path u, w1 , w2 , . . . , wk , v from u to v in
that connected component. Since w1 is simplicial in Gi and thus in G[Li ], u is adjacent
to w2 . Similarly, by induction, u is adjacent to all of the vertices w1 , . . . , wk , v. Hence u
and v are adjacent, as desired.


Observation 2 If G \ X is connected, then Lt is a clique.


     Proof: Let u, v ∈ Lt , and let P be a shortest path from u to v in G \ X. None of
the vertices of P are simplicial in Gi for i ∈ [t − 1], since otherwise there would be a
shorter path than P from u to v. Hence P ⊆ Lt , so u and v belong to the same connected
component of G[Lt ], which is a clique by Observation 1.


Observation 3 Let i ∈ [t], let C be a connected component of G[Li ], and let u, v ∈ C.
Then NGi (u) \ {v} = NGi (v) \ {u}.


     Proof: If u = v then we are done, so suppose u ̸= v. Let w ∈ NGi (u) \ {v}. We know
u and v are adjacent by Observation 1, and u is simplicial in Gi . Hence w ∈ NGi (v) \ {u}.


                                               47
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2


Observation 4 If G \ X is connected, X is a clique, and X ⊆ N (Lt ), then X ∪ Lt is a
clique.


     Proof: By Observation 3 with i = t, we know N (u) ∩ X = N (v) ∩ X for all u, v ∈ Lt .
This implies that x and v are adjacent for all x ∈ X, v ∈ Lt . Since Lt is a clique by
Observation 2, we conclude that X ∪ Lt is a clique.


Observation 5 If G \ X is connected, then Gi \ X is connected for all i ∈ [t].


     Proof: We proceed by induction by showing that if Gi \X is connected, then Gi+1 \X
is connected, for all i ∈ [t − 1]. Suppose Gi \ X is connected for some i, and let u, v be
vertices in Gi+1 \ X. Let P be a shortest path from u to v in Gi \ X. No intermediate
vertices on P are simplicial in Gi , since otherwise there would be a shorter path from u
to v in Gi \ X. Therefore, the same path P still exists in Gi+1 \ X, and hence Gi+1 \ X
is connected.


Lemma 13 Let C = V (G) \ X. If G \ X is connected, then N (C) = N (Lt ) ∩ X.


     Proof: It is clear that N (Lt ) ∩ X ⊆ N (C). To see that N (C) ⊆ N (Lt ) ∩ X, it
is sufficient to show N (Li ) ∩ X ⊆ N (Li+1 ∪ . . . ∪ Lt ) ∩ X for all i ∈ [t − 1]. Suppose
u ∈ N (Li ) ∩ X, so there is some vertex v ∈ Li that is adjacent to u ∈ X. We know
Gi \ X is connected by Observation 5, so there is a path v, w1 , w2 , . . . , wk , w in Gi \ X
from v to some vertex w ∈ Li+1 ∪ . . . ∪ Lt . We can assume v, w1 , w2 , . . . , wk ∈ Li by
shortening the tail of the path if need be. Since v is simplicial in Gi , w1 is adjacent
to u. Similarly, by induction, all of the vertices w1 , . . . , wk , w are adjacent to u. Hence
u ∈ N (Li+1 ∪ . . . ∪ Lt ) ∩ X.


Lemma 14 If C is a connected component of G \ X, then N (C) = N (Lt ∩ C) ∩ X.


                                              48
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                             Chapter 2


     Proof: By an argument similar to Observation 5, since C is connected, what remains
of C in Gi is connected for all i ∈ [t]. Therefore, we can see that N (Li ∩ C) ∩ X ⊆
N ((Li+1 ∪ . . . ∪ Lt ) ∩ C) ∩ X for all i ∈ [t − 1] by an argument similar to the proof of
Lemma 13.


Evaporation time is preserved after gluing or taking induced subgraphs

    The rest of the evaporation sequence lemmas that we need all have a similar flavor.
For almost every recurrence, we need to show that the evaporation time of a chordal
graph is preserved after gluing or taking induced subgraphs, as long as we choose the
exception sets correctly and certain properties hold. For example, the simplest of these
lemmas, Lemma 16, will be used to prove the recurrence for g(t, x, k, z) (Lemma 3).

Lemma 15 Suppose G is a connected chordal graph that contains a clique X, and sup-
pose C is a connected component of G \ X. Then the evaporation time of C in G is equal
to the evaporation time of G[X ∪ C], assuming both have exception set X.

     Proof: Let G′ = G[X ∪ C]. Let L1 , . . . , Lt be the evaporation sequence of G with
exception set X, and let Gi = G \ (L1 ∪ · · · ∪ Li−1 ) for i ∈ [t]. Similarly, let L′1 , . . . , L′s be
the evaporation sequence of G′ with exception set X, and let G′i = G′ \ (L′1 ∪ · · · ∪ L′i−1 )
for i ∈ [s]. For every v ∈ C, we know NG′ (v) = NG (v) since NG (v) ⊆ X ∪ C, so v is
simplicial in G if and only if v is simplicial in G′ . Hence L′1 = L1 ∩ C. Continuing by
induction, we can see that at each time step, the same set of vertices evaporates from
C in both Gi and G′i , and the vertices of X never evaporate. More precisely, for all
1 ≤ i ≤ s, and for all v ∈ C that have not yet evaporated, we have NG′i (v) = NGi (v),
and thus L′i = Li ∩ C. Therefore, C has the same evaporation time in both G and G′ .

Lemma 16 Suppose G is a connected chordal graph that contains a clique X, and sup-
pose C1 , . . . , Cr are connected components of G \ X. Then for every j ∈ [r], the evapo-
                                                  49
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                       Chapter 2


ration time of Cj in G is equal to the evaporation time of Cj in G[X ∪ C1 ∪ · · · ∪ Cr ],
assuming both have exception set X.


    Proof: For each j ∈ [r], the statement for Cj follows immediately from two appli-
cations of Lemma 15: first with the graph G and the component Cj , and then with the
graph G[X ∪ C1 ∪ · · · ∪ Cr ] and the component Cj .


Lemma 17 Suppose G is a connected chordal graph that evaporates at time t ≥ 2 with
exception set X. Let L = LG (X), and suppose X ∪ L is a clique. Let A be the set of
vertices in connected components C of G \ (X ∪ L) such that C evaporates at time exactly
t − 1 in G with exception set X, and let B be the set of vertices of all other components
of G \ (X ∪ L). Let G1 = G[X ∪ L ∪ A] and G2 = G[X ∪ L ∪ B]. Then the following
statements hold:

  1. G1 evaporates at time t, every component of G1 \ (X ∪ L) evaporates at time t − 1
      in G1 , and we have LG1 (X) = L, when X is the exception set. Furthermore, A is
      nonempty.

  2. G2 evaporates in time at most t − 2 with exception set X ∪ L.


    Proof: To prove (1), we proceed using an argument similar to Lemma 15. In that
lemma, the induction step relied on the fact that the vertices of X never evaporate. For
a similar argument to hold here, we need to show that at time steps 1, . . . , t − 1 in G1 ,
none of the vertices of L evaporate. Let L1 , . . . , Lt be the evaporation sequence of G with
                                                                                (1)       (1)
exception set X, and let Gi = G\(L1 ∪· · ·∪Li−1 ) for i ∈ [t]. Similarly, let L1 , . . . , Ls be
                                                                   (1)          (1)         (1)
the evaporation sequence of G1 with exception set X, and let Gi = G1 \(L1 ∪· · ·∪Li−1 )
for i ∈ [s]. None of the vertices of L are simplicial in Gt−1 . This means that every vertex
u ∈ L has two distinct non-adjacent neighbors v1 , v2 ∈ A that belong to Gt−1 , since the

                                              50
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                         Chapter 2


other components of G \ (X ∪ L) besides those in A have already evaporated before we
reach Gt−1 . The existence of v1 and v2 (since L is nonempty) implies that A is nonempty.
   By an argument similar to Lemma 15, for every u ∈ L, its neighbors v1 and v2 do
not evaporate in the first t − 2 steps of the evaporation sequence of G1 , i.e., they still
          (1)
exist in Gt−1 . Furthermore, the vertices that have evaporated from A in each time step
                                         (1)
to create Gt are the same as those for Gt . Therefore, every component of G1 \ (X ∪ L)
                                                    (1)
evaporates at time t − 1 in G1 . In the end, Gt           is the clique X ∪ L, so all of L is now
simplicial, which yields LG1 (X) = L.
   To prove (2), we again use an argument similar to Lemma 15. In both G and G2
(with the specified exception sets), none of the vertices of X ∪ L evaporate before time
step t. Therefore, in the first t − 2 time steps, the evaporation behavior of G2 is exactly
the same as it was for the corresponding vertices in G, which evaporate in time at most
t − 2.


Lemma 18 Let G1 and G2 be connected chordal graphs such that V (G1 )∩V (G2 ) = X∪L,
where L = LG1 (X) and X ∪ L is a clique. Suppose G1 evaporates at time t ≥ 2 with
exception set X, and suppose every connected component of G1 \ (X ∪ L) evaporates at
time exactly t − 1 in G1 with exception set X. Also, suppose every connected component
of G2 \ (X ∪ L) evaporates in time at most t − 2 in G2 with exception set X ∪ L. If we
glue G1 and G2 together at X ∪ L, then the resulting graph G evaporates at time t with
exception set X, and LG (X) = L.


     Proof: Adding more vertices to a graph can only increase the evaporation time of a
given vertex. Therefore, when we attach G2 to G1 to obtain G, the resulting evaporation
time of each vertex in L is at least t (with exception set X). This implies that the
evaporation behavior of the vertices of G2 \ (X ∪ L) is the same in G as it was in G2 by
an argument similar to Lemma 15, since all of X ∪ L certainly stays alive until time t in
                                               51
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                  Chapter 2


both G2 (since it is the exception set) and G (by the argument above).
   Now we just need to show that the evaporation behavior of the vertices of G1 is
the same in G as it was in G1 . When we attach G2 to G1 , the only vertices of G1
whose neighborhoods can change are those in X ∪ L. The only way this could affect the
evaporation behavior of G1 would be by increasing the evaporation time of some vertices
in L. However, we just showed that all of the vertices of G2 \ (X ∪ L) evaporate in time
at most t − 2. Therefore, just before time step t (with exception set X), G1 and G are
identical since by then, all of G2 \ G1 has evaporated. Therefore, all of the vertices of L
evaporate at time t in G, just as they did in G1 .


Lemma 19 Suppose G is a connected chordal graph such that X ∪ L is a clique, where
L = LG (X), and suppose every connected component of G \ (X ∪ L) evaporates at time
exactly t − 1 in G with exception set X, where t ≥ 2. Suppose C1 , . . . , Cr are connected
components of G \ (X ∪ L). Then for every j ∈ [r], Cj evaporates at time exactly t − 1
in G[X ∪ L ∪ C1 ∪ · · · ∪ Cr ] with exception set X ∪ L.


    Proof: Let G′ = G[X ∪ L ∪ C1 ∪ · · · ∪ Cr ]. By Lemma 16, the evaporation time of
Cj in G with exception set X ∪ L is equal to the evaporation time of Cj in G′ with the
same exception set. Furthermore, the evaporation time of Cj in G is the same with either
exception set (X or X ∪ L) since the evaporation time of Cj in G is less than t when X
is the exception set.
   Suppose G is a chordal graph with evaporation sequence L1 , . . . , Lt and exception set
X, where t ≥ 2. For a connected component C of G[Lt−1 ], since by Observation 3 all ver-
tices of C have the same neighborhood outside of C in Gt−1 , we denote the neighborhood
of C in X ∪ Lt by N̂ (C) := NGt−1 (v) ∩ (X ∪ Lt ) = NG (v) ∩ (X ∪ Lt ) for all v ∈ C.
   Given a universe U and a subset L ⊆ U , we say a collection S of subsets of U is a set


                                            52
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                  Chapter 2

                 S
cover for L if       S∈S S ⊇ L. For a chordal graph G as described above, let


                     SG = {N̂ (C) : C is a connected component of G[Lt−1 ]}.

Each set in SG is a subset of the universe X ∪ Lt .

Lemma 20 Suppose G is a chordal graph with evaporation sequence L1 , . . . , Lt and ex-
ception set X, where t ≥ 2, and suppose X ∪ Lt is a clique. Then one of the following
holds:

  1. There is at most one connected component C of G[Lt−1 ] such that N̂ (C) = X ∪ Lt ,
      and SG \ {X ∪ Lt } is a set cover for Lt .

  2. There are at least two distinct connected components C1 , C2 of G[Lt−1 ] such that
      N̂ (Ci ) = X ∪ Lt for i ∈ {1, 2}.

    Proof: We show that if there is at most one connected component of G[Lt−1 ], say
C, such that N̂ (C) = X ∪ Lt , then SG \ {X ∪ Lt } is a set cover for Lt . If C does not
exist, then we let C = ∅ to simplify notation. Suppose to the contrary that there is some
vertex v ∈ Lt that is not covered by any neighborhood S ⊊ X ∪ Lt in SG . If there is
a component C ′ of G[Lt−1 ] such that v ∈ N̂ (C ′ ), then we must have N̂ (C ′ ) = X ∪ Lt .
Therefore, there is at most one such component C ′ , and if one exists we have C ′ = C.
Hence NGt−1 (v) = (X ∪ Lt ∪ C) \ {v}. Since C is a clique by Observation 1, X ∪ Lt ∪ C
is a clique. This means v is simplicial in Gt−1 , which contradicts v ∈ Lt .

Lemma 21 Suppose G is a connected chordal graph that evaporates at time t ≥ 2 with
exception set X. Let L = LG (X), and suppose X ∪ L is a clique. Furthermore, suppose
every connected component of G \ (X ∪ L) evaporates at time exactly t − 1 in G with
exception set X. Suppose exactly one connected component C of G \ (X ∪ L) sees all
of X ∪ L, and let D be the set of vertices of all other components of G \ (X ∪ L). Let
                                               53
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                   Chapter 2


G2 = G[X ∪ L ∪ D]. Then when X is the exception set, we have the following: G2
evaporates at time t, every component of G2 \ (X ∪ L) evaporates at time t − 1 in G2 ,
and LG2 (X) = L. Furthermore, D is nonempty.


    Proof: Let L1 , . . . , Lt be the evaporation sequence of G with exception set X. By
Lemma 14 (with exception set X ∪ L rather than X), we have N (C) = N (Lt−1 ∩ C) ∩
(X ∪ L) for every connected component C ′ of G \ (X ∪ L). Furthermore, the connected
components of G \ (X ∪ L) each intersected with Lt−1 are the same as the connected
components of G[Lt−1 ] by an argument similar to Observation 5. Exactly one component
of G \ (X ∪ L) sees all of X ∪ L, so this means that exactly one component of G[Lt−1 ]
sees all of X ∪ L. By Lemma 20, this implies that SG \ {X ∪ L} is a set cover for L. We
observe that SG \{X ∪L} = SG2 \{X ∪L} since we only removed the component C whose
neighborhood is N̂ (C) = X ∪ L from G when defining G2 . Therefore, SG2 \ {X ∪ L} is
also a set cover for L. This means D must be nonempty since L is nonempty.
   As long as none of the vertices of L evaporate before time t in G2 , then we can see
by an argument similar to Lemma 15 that the evaporation behavior of G2 is the same as
it was for the corresponding vertices in G (both with exception set X). Suppose for a
contradiction that u ∈ L is the first vertex in L to evaporate before time t in G2 . Suppose
this happens at time s, where s < t. By an argument similar to Lemma 15, since none
of L had evaporated before that point, all of Lt−1 still exists in G2 just before time s.
The vertex u is contained in some neighborhood from SG2 \ {X ∪ L} since this is a set
cover. Let v be a vertex in Lt−1 from the component of G2 \ (X ∪ L) corresponding to
that neighborhood. Since that neighborhood is a proper subset of X ∪ L, there is also
some vertex w ∈ X ∪ L adjacent to u that does not belong to that neighborhood. Hence
v and w are not adjacent, so u is not simplicial at time s, which is a contradiction.
   Therefore, the evaporation behavior of G2 is the same as it was for the corresponding

                                            54
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2


vertices in G, so G2 evaporates at time t, every component of G2 \ (X ∪ L) evaporates
at time t − 1, and LG2 (X) = L.


Lemma 22 Let G1 and G2 be connected chordal graphs such that V (G1 ) ∩ V (G2 ) = X̂,
where X̂ is a clique. Suppose G1 \ X̂ has at least two connected components, both of which
see all of X̂. Suppose every connected component of G1 \ X̂ (resp. G2 \ X̂) evaporates at
time exactly t − 1 in G1 (resp. G2 ) with exception set X̂, where t ≥ 2. Let X ⊊ X̂. If
we glue G1 and G2 together at X̂, then the resulting graph G evaporates at time t with
exception set X, every connected component of G \ X̂ evaporates at time t − 1 in G, and
LG (X) = X̂ \ X.


    Proof: When we glue G1 and G2 together (and change the exception set from X̂ to
X), as long as it is still the case that none of the vertices of X̂ evaporate before time t,
then we can see by an argument similar to Lemma 15 that the evaporation behavior of
these two graphs does not change. Suppose for a contradiction that u ∈ X̂ \ X is the
first vertex in X̂ to evaporate before time t in G. Suppose this happens at time s, where
s < t. Let L1 , . . . , Lt be the evaporation sequence of G1 with exception set X̂. Since u is
the first such vertex to evaporate, all of Lt−1 still exists in G just before time s. Let v and
w be neighbors of u from Lt−1 that belong to two distinct components of G1 \ X̂. Since v
and w are not adjacent, this means u is not simplicial at time s, which is a contradiction.
Therefore, the evaporation behavior of the vertices of G1 \ X̂ and G2 \ X̂ in G is the same
as in G1 and G2 . At time t, all of X̂ \ X evaporates since X̂ is a clique.


Lemma 23 Suppose G is a connected chordal graph that evaporates at time t ≥ 2 with
exception set X. Let L = LG (X), and suppose X ∪ L is a clique. Furthermore, suppose
every connected component of G \ (X ∪ L) evaporates at time exactly t − 1 in G with
exception set X. Let C be a component of G\(X ∪L), and let L′ = N (C)∩L. Let D be the

                                              55
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                    Chapter 2


set of vertices of all other components of G\(X ∪L), and let G2 = G[X ∪L∪D]. If L′ ⊊ L,
then when X ∪ L′ is the exception set, we have the following: G2 evaporates at time t,
every component of G2 \ (X ∪ L) evaporates at time t − 1 in G2 , and LG2 (X ∪ L′ ) = L \ L′ ;
furthermore, D is nonempty.


    Proof: Let L1 , . . . , Lt be the evaporation sequence of G with exception set X. By
an argument similar to the first paragraph of the proof of Lemma 21, we know N̂ (C) is
a proper subset of X ∪ L for every connected component C of G[Lt−1 ]. Therefore, by
Lemma 20, SG \ {X ∪ L} is a set cover for L, so it follows that SG2 \ {X ∪ L} is a set
cover for L \ L′ . Since L′ ⊊ L, it is easy to see that D is nonempty.
   By an argument similar to the second paragraph of the proof of Lemma 21, none of
the vertices of L \ L′ evaporate before time t in G2 . Therefore, the evaporation behavior
of G2 (with exception set X ∪ L′ ) is the same as it was for the corresponding vertices in
G (with exception set X), so G2 evaporates at time t, every component of G2 \ (X ∪ L)
evaporates at time t − 1, and LG2 (X ∪ L′ ) = L \ L′ .


Lemma 24 Let G1 and G2 be connected chordal graphs such that V (G1 ) ∩ V (G2 ) = X.
                                                                                 e

Suppose G2 contains a clique X̂ ⊇ X.
                                  e Furthermore, suppose G1 \ X
                                                              e has exactly one
                                       e and evaporates at time exactly t − 1 in G1 with
connected component, which sees all of X
              e where t ≥ 2. Let L′ be a subset of X,
exception set X,                                   e and let X = X̂ \ L′ . Let G be the

graph obtained by gluing together G1 and G2 at X.
                                               e Then we have the following:


  1. Suppose G2 evaporates at time t with exception set X̂, and let L̂ = LG2 (X̂). Suppose
      X̂ ∪ L̂ is a clique in G2 , and suppose every connected component of G2 \ (X̂ ∪ L̂)
      evaporates at time exactly t − 1 in G2 . Then G evaporates at time t with exception
      set X, every connected component of G \ (X̂ ∪ L̂) evaporates at time t − 1 in G,
      and LG (X) = L′ ∪ L̂.

                                             56
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2


   2. Suppose every connected component of G2 \ X̂ evaporates at time exactly t − 1 in
      G2 with exception set X̂, and suppose X
                                            e ⊊ X̂. Then G evaporates at time t with

      exception set X, every connected component of G \ X̂ evaporates at time t − 1 in
      G, and LG (X) = L′ .


     Proof: First, we prove statement (1). When we glue G1 and G2 together (and
change the exception set to X), as long as it is still the case that none of the vertices of
X̂ evaporate before time t, then we can see by an argument similar to Lemma 15 that the
evaporation behavior of these two graphs does not change. Suppose for a contradiction
that u ∈ X̂ \ X is the first vertex in X̂ to evaporate before time t in G. Suppose this
happens at time s, where s < t. Let L1 , . . . , Lt−1 be the evaporation sequence of G1
                   X. Let v ∈ Lt−1 , and let C = V (G1 ) \ e
with exception set e                                      X. By Lemma 13, we know
e = N (C) = N (Lt−1 ) ∩ e
X                      X, so u and v are adjacent since u ∈ e        e ⊊ X̂ ∪ L̂, there
                                                            X. Since X
is some vertex w ∈ X̂ ∪ L̂ that is adjacent to u but not v. Therefore, u is not simplicial
at time s, which is a contradiction. Therefore, the evaporation behavior of the vertices of
     e and G2 \ X̂ in G is the same as in G1 and G2 . At time t, all of L′ ∪ L̂ evaporates
G1 \ X
since X̂ ∪ L̂ is a clique.
   For statement (2), the proof is exactly the same except for the following differences.
                                e ⊊ X̂ ∪ L̂. . . ” should instead say, “Since X
The sentence that begins “Since X                                             e ⊊ X̂, there

is some vertex w ∈ X̂ that is adjacent to u but not v.” And we change the concluding
sentence to the following: “At time t, all of L′ evaporates since X̂ is a clique.”


2.5.3     Proofs of recurrences

   As in the counting algorithm, all graphs in this section are ω-colorable. We do not ex-
plicity mention this in each lemma, since ω-colorablitity does not change the recurrences
(it only affects the base cases).

                                            57
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                   Chapter 2


    By Lemma 11, every induced subgraph of a chordal graph contains a simplicial vertex,
so a chordal graph on n vertices evaporates in time at most n when the exception set is
X = ∅. Therefore, the number of connected chordal graphs with vertex set [n] is
                                                    n
                                                    X
                                           c(n) =         g̃1 (t, 0, n).
                                                    t=1

Throughout this section, suppose t, x, ℓ, k, z are nonnegative integers in the domain of
the relevant function, and suppose we are not yet at a base case. Let G(t, x, k, z) be
the set of graphs counted by g(t, x, k, z), and similarly let e
                                                              G(t, x, k, z), G
                                                                             ep (t, x, k, z),

G
e1 (t, x, k), G
              e≥2 (t, x, k), F (t, x, ℓ, k), Fe(t, x, ℓ, k), Fep (t, x, ℓ, k), and Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, z), be the

sets of graphs counted by g̃(t, x, k, z), g̃p (t, x, k, z), g̃1 (t, x, k), g̃≥2 (t, x, k), f (t, x, ℓ, k),
f˜(t, x, ℓ, k), f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k), and f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z), respectively.
    We are now ready to prove correctness of the recurrences. For the proofs of the
following lemmas, let X = [x] according to the current value of the argument x. We
proceed in the order in which these functions were defined in Definition 3, so that similar
functions and proofs appear consecutively. (This is somewhat different from the ordering
of the lemma numbers.)


Lemma 3 For g, we have
                                       k  
                                     X     k
                     g(t, x, k, z) =         ′
                                               g̃(t, x, k ′ , z)g(t − 1, x, k − k ′ , z).
                                     k′ =0
                                           k

     Proof: To see that g(t, x, k, z) is at most this summation, suppose G ∈ G(t, x, k, z).
Let A be the set of vertices in components C of G \ X such that C evaporates at time
exactly t in G with exception set X, and let B be the set of vertices of all other components
of G \ X. Let G1 = G[X ∪ A], G2 = G[X ∪ B], and k ′ = |A|. Now relabel G1 by applying
ϕ(A, [x + 1, x + k ′ ]) to the labels in A, and relabel G2 by applying ϕ(B, [x + 1, x + k − k ′ ])
to the labels in B. Note that G1 and G2 are connected since G is connected. Since every

                                                      58
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                         Chapter 2


component of G \ X has at least one neighbor in X \ [z], the same is true of G1 \ X and
                                            G(t, x, k ′ , z) and G2 ∈ G(t−1, x, k−k ′ , z).
G2 \X. Therefore, by Lemma 16, we have G1 ∈ e
   We claim that this process (including the relabeling step) is injective, i.e., distinct
graphs G give rise to distinct triples (G1 , G2 , A). Indeed, suppose that starting from
G ∈ G(t, x, k, z), we obtain (G1 , G2 , A) along with the set B of remaining components,
and starting from a distinct graph G′ ∈ G(t, x, k, z), we obtain (G′1 , G′2 , A′ ) and the set
B ′ . If A ̸= A′ , then we are done, so suppose A = A′ . If G[X ∪ A] ̸= G′ [X ∪ A′ ], then after
relabeling, G[X ∪ A] still differs from G′ [X ∪ A′ ] since ϕ(A, [x + 1, x + k ′ ]) is a bijection.
Otherwise, G[X ∪ B] ̸= G′ [X ∪ B ′ ], in which case G[X ∪ B] still differs from G′ [X ∪ B ′ ]
even after relabeling. Therefore, g(t, x, k, z) is at most the number of possible triples
(G1 , G2 , A), which is given by the summation above.
   We now show that g(t, x, k, z) is bounded below by the same summation. Suppose
we are given 0 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, a graph G1 ∈ G(t,
                                       e x, k ′ , z), a graph G2 ∈ G(t − 1, x, k − k ′ , z),

and a subset A ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size k ′ . Let B = [x + 1, x + k] \ A. We construct a graph
G ∈ G(t, x, k, z) as follows: Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k ′ ], A) to the labels in
G1 \ X, and relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k − k ′ ], B) to the labels in G2 \ X. By
Lemma 12, since X is a clique in both G1 and G2 , we can glue G1 and G2 together at X
to obtain a chordal graph G. The resulting label set for G is [x + k], and G is connected
since G1 and G2 are connected. Furthermore, every component of G \ X has at least
one neighbor in X \ [z] since the same is true of G1 \ X and G2 \ X. By Lemma 16, G
evaporates in time at most t, so we have G ∈ G(t, x, k, z).
   Suppose (G1 , G2 , A) and (G′1 , G′2 , A′ ) are distinct triples of the above form that give
rise to G and G′ , respectively. If A ̸= A′ , then by Lemma 16, G ̸= G′ . By the same
lemma, if G1 ̸= G′1 (resp. G2 ̸= G′2 ), then the components of G \ X and G′ \ X that
evaporate at time exactly t (resp. less than t) will differ, which implies G ̸= G′ . Therefore,
g(t, x, k, z) is at least the summation above.
                                               59
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                   Chapter 2


   In the above lemma, we showed that the process that builds G1 and G2 from G (and
vice versa) is injective, which ensures there is no double counting. In the lemmas that
follow, we will build up similar injective maps in each direction. We only prove injectivity
in detail in the proof of Lemma 3 since the arguments for the following lemmas are similar.


Lemma 4 For g̃, we have
                          k X
                            x                       
                          X     x               z     k−1
       g̃(t, x, k, z) =                      −               g̃1 (t, x′ , k ′ )g̃(t, x, k − k ′ , z).
                          k′ =1 x′ =1
                                        x′      x′   k′ − 1

     Proof: To see that g̃(t, x, k, z) is at most this summation, suppose G ∈ G(t,
                                                                              e x, k, z).

Let C be the component of G \ X that contains the label x + 1, and let D be the
set of vertices of all other components of G \ X. Let X ′ = N (C), G1 = G[X ′ ∪ C],
G2 = G[X ∪ D], k ′ = |C|, and x′ = |N (C)|. Note that X ′ ̸⊆ [z] since C has at least one
neighbor in X \[z]. Now relabel G1 by applying ϕ(X ′ , [x′ ]) to the labels in X ′ and applying
ϕ(C, [x′ + 1, x′ + k ′ ]) to the labels in C. Relabel G2 by applying ϕ(D, [x + 1, x + k − k ′ ])
to the labels in D. Since every component of G \ X has at least one neighbor in X \ [z],
                                                                 e x, k − k ′ , z).
the same is true of G2 \ X. Therefore, by Lemma 16, we have G2 ∈ G(t,
                  e1 (t, x′ , k ′ ) by an argument similar to Lemma 16; the only difference
We also have G1 ∈ G
here is that the exception set is X ′ rather than X since C does not necessarily see all
of X. (We chose C to be the component of G \ X that contains the lowest label rather
than choosing an arbitrary component of G \ X so that this process is injective.) Hence
g̃(t, x, k, z) is at most the summation above.
   We now show that g̃(t, x, k, z) is bounded below by this summation. Suppose we are
given 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, 1 ≤ x′ ≤ x, a graph G1 ∈ G
                                            e1 (t, x′ , k ′ ), a graph G2 ∈ G(t,
                                                                            e x, k − k ′ , z), a

subset C ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size k ′ that contains x + 1, and a subset X ′ ⊆ X of size x′ such
that X ′ ̸⊆ [z]. Let D = [x+1, x+k]\C. We construct a graph G ∈ G(t,
                                                                e x, k, z) as follows:

Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x′ ], X ′ ) to the labels in [x′ ] and applying ϕ([x′ + 1, x′ + k ′ ], C)

                                                     60
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                         Chapter 2


to the labels in G1 \ [x′ ]. Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k − k ′ ], D) to the labels in
G2 \ X. By Lemma 12, we can glue G1 and G2 together at X ′ to obtain a chordal graph
G. Every component of G \ X has at least one neighbor in X \ [z] since G2 \ X has that
property, and because X ′ ̸⊆ [z]. By an argument similar to Lemma 16, G evaporates at
time exactly t, so we have G ∈ e
                               G(t, x, k, z). Therefore, g̃(t, x, k, z) is at least the number
of possible choices for G1 , G2 , C, and X ′ .

Lemma 7 For g̃p , we have
                           k x−1                         
                           XX            x           z     k−1
      g̃p (t, x, k, z) =                          −               g̃1 (t, x′ , k ′ )g̃p (t, x, k − k ′ , z).
                           k′ =1 x′ =1
                                         x′          x′   k′ − 1

     Proof: The argument for g̃p is similar to the proof for g̃ (Lemma 4), except we do
not allow x′ = x since no component of G \ X sees all of X.

Lemma 1 For g̃1 , we have
                                                    k  
                                                   X   k
                                   g̃1 (t, x, k) =       f (t, x, ℓ, k − ℓ).
                                                   ℓ=1
                                                       ℓ

     Proof: To see that g̃1 (t, x, k) is at most this summation, suppose G ∈ G
                                                                             e1 (t, x, k).

Let C = V (G) \ X, L = LG (X), A = C \ L, and ℓ = |L|. We know N (C) = X by the
              e1 (t, x, k), and by Lemma 13, this implies N (L) ∩ X = X. Therefore, X ∪ L
definition of G
is a clique by Observation 4. Relabel G by applying ϕ(L, [x + 1, x + ℓ]) to L and applying
ϕ(A, [x + ℓ + 1, x + k]) to A. We now have G ∈ F (t, x, ℓ, k − ℓ) since LG (X) uses the
label set [x + 1, x + ℓ], and relabeling vertices does not change the evaporation time of
the graph. Hence g̃1 (t, x, k) is at most the summation above.
   We now show that g̃1 (t, x, k) is bounded below by this summation. Suppose we are
given 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, a graph G ∈ F (t, x, ℓ, k − ℓ), and a subset L ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size ℓ.
Let A = [x + 1, x + k] \ L. Now relabel G by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + ℓ], L) to the labels in
[x + 1, x + ℓ] and applying ϕ([x + ℓ + 1, x + k], A) to the labels in [x + ℓ + 1, x + k]. Observe
                                                          61
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                           Chapter 2


that L sees all of X since X ∪ L is a clique, which implies G ∈ G
                                                                e1 (t, x, k). Therefore,

g̃1 (t, x, k) is at least the number of possible choices for G and L.


Lemma 6 For g̃≥2 , we have
                            k−1      
                            X     k−1                                                                    
         g̃≥2 (t, x, k) =                    g̃1 (t, x, k ′ ) g̃1 (t, x, k − k ′ ) + g̃≥2 (t, x, k − k ′ ) .
                            k′ =1
                                    k′ − 1

     Proof: To see that g̃≥2 (t, x, k) is at most this summation, suppose G ∈ G
                                                                              e≥2 (t, x, k).

Let C be the component of G \ X that contains the lowest label not in X, and let D be
the set of vertices of all other components of G \ X. Let G1 = G[X ∪ C], G2 = G[X ∪ D],
and k ′ = |C|. Now relabel G1 by applying ϕ(C, [x + 1, x + k ′ ]) to the labels in C, and
relabel G2 by applying ϕ(D, [x + 1, x + k − k ′ ]) to the labels in D. By Lemma 16, if
                                                      e1 (t, x, k − k ′ ), and otherwise,
G \ X has exactly two connected components, then G2 ∈ G
     e≥2 (t, x, k − k ′ ). In either case, G1 ∈ G
G2 ∈ G                                          e1 (t, x, k ′ ). Hence g̃≥2 (t, x, k) is at most the

summation above.
    We now show that g̃≥2 (t, x, k) is bounded below by this summation. Suppose we are
given 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, a graph G1 ∈ G
                                e1 (t, x, k ′ ), a graph G2 that belongs to G
                                                                            e1 (t, x, k − k ′ )
   e≥2 (t, x, k − k ′ ), and a subset C ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size k ′ that contains x + 1. Let
or G
D = [x + 1, x + k] \ C. We construct a graph G ∈ G(t,
                                                 e x, k) as follows: Relabel G1 by

applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k ′ ], C) to the labels in [x + 1, x + k ′ ], and relabel G2 by applying
ϕ([x+1, x+k−k ′ ], D) to the labels in [x+1, x+k−k ′ ]. By Lemma 12, we can glue G1 and
G2 together at X to obtain a chordal graph G. By Lemma 16, we have G ∈ G
                                                                       e≥2 (t, x, k).

Therefore, g̃≥2 (t, x, k) is at least the summation above.


Lemma 2 For f , we have
                                     k
                                     X         
                                             k ˜
                 f (t, x, ℓ, k) =                f (t, x, ℓ, k ′ )g(t − 2, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x).
                                     k′ =1
                                             k′


                                                        62
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                           Chapter 2


     Proof: To see that f (t, x, ℓ, k) is at most this summation, suppose G ∈ F (t, x, ℓ, k).
Let L = LG (X). Let A be the set of vertices in components C of G \ (X ∪ L) such that C
evaporates at time exactly t−1 in G with exception set X, and let B be the set of vertices
of all other components of G \ (X ∪ L). Let G1 = G[X ∪ L ∪ A], G2 = G[X ∪ L ∪ B],
and k ′ = |A|. Now relabel G1 by applying ϕ(A, [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k ′ ]) to the labels in
A, and relabel G2 by applying ϕ(B, [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ]) to the labels in B. Note
that G1 , G1 \ X, and G2 are connected since G \ X is connected and X ∪ L is a clique.
Hence we have G1 ∈ Fe(t, x, ℓ, k ′ ) by Lemma 17-(1). Since G \ X is connected, every
component of G2 \ (X ∪ L) has a neighbor in L. Therefore, by Lemma 17-(2), we have
G2 ∈ G(t − 2, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x), so f (t, x, ℓ, k) is at most the summation above.
   We now show that f (t, x, ℓ, k) is bounded below by this summation. Suppose we are
given 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, a graph G1 ∈ Fe(t, x, ℓ, k ′ ), a graph G2 ∈ G(t − 2, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x), and a
subset A ⊆ [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] of size k ′ . Let B = [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] \ A. We construct a
graph G ∈ G(t, x, k) as follows: Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k ′ ], A) to the
labels in [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k ′ ], and relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ], B)
to the labels in [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ]. By Lemma 12, we can glue G1 and G2 together
at [x + ℓ] to obtain a chordal graph G. We know G \ X is connected since G1 \ X is
connected and every component of G2 \ ([x + ℓ]) has a neighbor in [x + 1, x + ℓ], so by
Lemma 18, we have G ∈ F (t, x, ℓ, k). Therefore, f (t, x, ℓ, k) is at least the number of
possible choices for G1 , G2 , and A.

Lemma 5 For f˜, we have
                                               k  
                                               X  k
         f˜(t, x, ℓ, k) = f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k) +                g̃1 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ )f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k − k ′ )
                                               k′ =1
                                                       k′
                              k        
                              X       k
                          +              g̃≥2 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ )g̃p (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x).
                              k′ =1
                                      k′

     Proof: To see that f˜(t, x, ℓ, k) is at most this summation, suppose G ∈ Fe(t, x, ℓ, k),
                                                       63
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                            Chapter 2


and let L = LG (X). The graph G falls into one of three cases: either zero, one, or
at least two components of G \ (X ∪ L) see all of X ∪ L. In the first case, we have
G ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k). If G falls into the second or third case, then let A be the set of vertices
in the components that see all of X ∪ L, and let B be the set of vertices of all other
components of G \ (X ∪ L). Let G1 = G[X ∪ L ∪ A], G2 = G[X ∪ L ∪ B], and k ′ = |A|.
Now relabel G1 by applying ϕ(A, [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k ′ ]) to the labels in A, and relabel G2
by applying ϕ(B, [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ]) to the labels in B. If A consists of exactly one
                                                         e1 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ ), and by
component of G \ (X ∪ L), then by Lemma 19, we have G1 ∈ G
Lemma 21, we have G2 ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k − k ′ ). Since G \ X is connected, every component
of G2 \ (X ∪ L) has a neighbor in L. Therefore, if A consists of at least two components,
                               e≥2 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ ) and G2 ∈ G
then by Lemma 19, we have G1 ∈ G                                 ep (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x).

Hence f˜(t, x, ℓ, k) is at most the summation above.
    We now show that f˜(t, x, ℓ, k) is bounded below by this summation. First of all, every
graph in Fep (t, x, ℓ, k) belongs to Fe(t, x, ℓ, k). For the second and third case, suppose we
are given 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, a subset A ⊆ [x+ℓ+1, x+ℓ+k] of size k ′ , and either a pair of graphs
     e1 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ ) and G2 ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k − k ′ ) or a pair of graphs G1 ∈ G
G1 ∈ G                                                                                 e≥2 (t − 1, x +

ℓ, k ′ ) and G2 ∈ G
                  ep (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x). Let B = [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] \ A. We construct

a graph G ∈ Fe(t, x, ℓ, k) as follows: Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k ′ ], A) to
the labels in [x+ℓ+1, x+ℓ+k ′ ], and relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x+ℓ+1, x+ℓ+k −k ′ ], B)
to the labels in [x+ℓ+1, x+ℓ+k −k ′ ]. By Lemma 12, we can glue G1 and G2 together at
                                             e1 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ ) and G2 ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k − k ′ ),
[x + ℓ] to obtain a chordal graph G. If G1 ∈ G
then we know G \ X is connected since G2 \ X is connected and the one component
of G1 \ [x + ℓ] sees all of [x + ℓ]. In this case, by an argument similar to Lemma 18,
gluing together G1 and G2 does not change the evaporation behavior of either of those
                                                              e≥2 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ ) and
graphs, so we have G ∈ Fe(t, x, ℓ, k). For the case when G1 ∈ G
     ep (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x), we know G \ X is connected since every component of
G2 ∈ G
                                                 64
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                            Chapter 2


G1 \ [x + ℓ] sees all of [x + ℓ] and every component of G2 \ [x + ℓ] has a neighbor in
[x + 1, x + ℓ]. Hence we have G ∈ Fe(t, x, ℓ, k) by Lemma 22. Therefore, f˜(t, x, ℓ, k) is at
least the summation above.


Lemma 8 We have f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k) = f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, x).


        Proof: When z = x in fp (t, x, ℓ, k, z), the definitions of fp (t, x, ℓ, k) and fp (t, x, ℓ, k, z)
both require that G \ X is connected, and they are otherwise identical. Therefore,
f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k) = f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, x).


Lemma 9 For f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z), we have

f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z) =
                                                                   
                                                                     x
                                                                                          if ℓ′ > 0
                                                                        
k                                                              
X           X               k−1   ℓ                                
                                                                     x ′

                             ′     ′
                                     g̃1 (t − 1, x′ + ℓ′ , k ′ ) ·
                            k −1 ℓ
                                                                    x′ −        z
                                                                                    
k′ =1     0≤x′ ≤x                                                                        otherwise
          0≤ℓ′ ≤ℓ                                                        x       x′
        0<x′ +ℓ′ <x+ℓ
                                                                  
                                                                  f˜p (t, x + ℓ′ , ℓ − ℓ′ , k − k ′ , z) if ℓ′ < ℓ
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                              ·
                                                                  g̃p (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , z)
                                                                  
                                                                                                        otherwise.

        Proof: To see that f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z) is at most this summation, let G ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, z),
and let L = LG (X). Let C be the component of G \ (X ∪ L) that contains the lowest
label not in X ∪ L, and let D be the set of vertices of all other components of G \ (X ∪ L).
Let X ′ = N (C) ∩ X and L′ = N (C) ∩ L. Let G1 = G[X ′ ∪ L′ ∪ C], G2 = G[X ∪ L ∪ D],
k ′ = |C|, x′ = |X ′ |, and ℓ′ = |L′ |. Note that X ′ ̸⊆ [z] if ℓ′ = 0 since G \ [z] is connected.
Now relabel G1 by applying ϕ(X ′ , [x′ ]) to the labels in X ′ , applying ϕ(L′ , [x′ + 1, x′ + ℓ′ ])
to the labels in L′ , and applying ϕ(C, [x′ + ℓ′ + 1, x′ + ℓ′ + k ′ ]) to the labels in C. Relabel
G2 by applying ϕ(D, [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ]) to the labels in D. If ℓ′ < ℓ, then we
also relabel G2 further by applying ϕ(L′ , [x + 1, x + ℓ′ ]) to the labels in L′ and applying
                                                         65
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                 Chapter 2


ϕ(L\L′ , [x+ℓ′ +1, x+ℓ]) to the labels in L\L′ . By an argument similar to Lemma 19, we
          e1 (t − 1, x′ + ℓ′ , k ′ ); the only difference here is that the exception set is X ′ ∪ L′
have G1 ∈ G
rather than X ∪ L since C does not see all of X ∪ L. We know G2 \ [z] is connected since
G\[z] is connected. If ℓ′ < ℓ, then by Lemma 23, we have G2 ∈ Fep (t, x+ℓ′ , ℓ−ℓ′ , k −k ′ , z).
                                          ep (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , z). Hence f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z)
If ℓ′ = ℓ, then by Lemma 19, we have G2 ∈ G
is at most the summation above.
    We now show that f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k) is bounded below by this summation. Suppose we
are given 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, 0 ≤ x′ ≤ x, 0 ≤ ℓ′ ≤ ℓ such that 0 < x′ + ℓ′ < x + ℓ, a graph
     e1 (t − 1, x′ + ℓ′ , k ′ ), a graph G2 such that G2 ∈ Fep (t, x + ℓ′ , ℓ − ℓ′ , k − k ′ , z) if ℓ′ < ℓ
G1 ∈ G
         ep (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , z) otherwise, a subset C ⊆ [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] of size
and G2 ∈ G
k ′ that contains x + ℓ + 1, a subset X ′ ⊆ X of size x′ , with the added requirement that
X ′ ̸⊆ [z] if ℓ′ = 0, and a subset L′ ⊆ [x+1, x+ℓ] of size ℓ′ . Let D = [x+ℓ+1, x+ℓ+k]\C.
We construct a graph G ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, z) as follows: Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x′ ], X ′ )
to the labels in [x′ ], applying ϕ([x′ + 1, x′ + ℓ′ ], L′ ) to the labels in [x′ + 1, x′ + ℓ′ ], and
applying ϕ([x′ + ℓ′ + 1, x′ + ℓ′ + k ′ ], C) to the labels in [x′ + ℓ′ + 1, x′ + ℓ′ + k ′ ]. Relabel
G2 by applying ϕ([x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ], D) to the labels in [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ].
If ℓ′ < ℓ, then we also relabel G2 further by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + ℓ′ ], L′ ) to the labels
in [x + 1, x + ℓ′ ] and applying ϕ([x + ℓ′ + 1, x + ℓ], [x + 1, . . . , x + ℓ] \ L′ ) to the labels
in [x + ℓ′ + 1, x + ℓ]. By Lemma 12, we can glue G1 and G2 together at X ′ ∪ L′ to
obtain a chordal graph G. We know G \ [z] is connected since G2 \ [z] is connected and
X ′ ∪ L′ ̸⊆ [z]. By Lemma 24, we have G ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, z). Statement (1) of that lemma
deals with the case when ℓ′ < ℓ, and statement (2) deals with the case when ℓ′ = ℓ.
                                 e = X ′ ∪ L′ . For statement (1), we let X̂ = X ∪ L′ ;
When applying that lemma, we let X
for statement (2), we let X̂ = [x + ℓ]. Therefore, f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z) is at least the number of
possible choices for G1 , G2 , C, X ′ , and L′ .


                                                    66
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                  Chapter 2


2.5.4       Wrapping up the proof of Theorem 2

    Correctness of the counting algorithm for connected ω-colorable chordal graphs follows
immediately from the proofs of the recurrences above. All that remains to show is that
the algorithm terminates and uses at most O(n7 ) arithmetic operations.
    To see that the algorithm terminates, we observe that every time a cycle of recursive
calls returns to the same function where the cycle began, either the value of t decreases
or the number of vertices in the graph decreases. We can see this from Figure 2.2: the
only cycles where the value of t does not decrease are the black self-loops. For each these
self-loops, the number of vertices in the graph decreases in each call to the function. For
example, when g̃ calls itself in the recurrence for g̃, the number of vertices in the graph
decreases from x + k to x + k − k ′ , for some k ′ > 0. Similarly, the number of vertices in
the graph decreases in the self-loops corresponding to g̃≥2 , g̃p , and f˜p .
    To speed up the computation of the recurrence for f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z) (Lemma 9), we
observe that when k ′ is fixed, g̃1 (t − 1, x′ + ℓ′ , k ′ ) is a common factor for all choices of
x′ and ℓ′ that have the same sum x′ + ℓ′ . Reordering the terms of the sum and letting
r = x′ + ℓ′ , we obtain

f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z) =
                                                                
                                                                     x
                                                                                         if ℓ′ > 0
                                              min{r,ℓ}                
k x+ℓ−1
   X                                                          
X              k−1                      ′
                                               X          ℓ     
                                                                    r−ℓ′
                      g̃ 1 (t − 1, r, k   )                   ·
               k′ − 1                                     ℓ′ 
                                                                 x′ − z′
                                                                                    
k′ =1 r=1                                   ′
                                          ℓ =max{0,r−x}                                 otherwise
                                                                    r−ℓ        r−ℓ
                                                          
                                                          f˜p (t, x + ℓ′ , ℓ − ℓ′ , k − k ′ , z) if ℓ′ < ℓ
                                                          
                                                          
                                                        ·
                                                          g̃p (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , z)
                                                          
                                                                                                 otherwise.

Now the inner sum only depends on t, x, ℓ, z, r, and k − k ′ . Thus we define the helper




                                                         67
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                     Chapter 2


function
                                                     
                                                          x
                                                                              if ℓ′ > 0
                                  min{r,ℓ}         
                                                             
                                   X           ℓ     
                                                        r−ℓ ′
       h(t, x, ℓ, z, r, k) :=                      ·
                                              ℓ′
                                                      x′ − z′
                                                                      
                              ℓ′ =max{0,r−x}                                 otherwise
                                                        r−ℓ       r−ℓ
                                                     
                                                     f˜p (t, x + ℓ′ , ℓ − ℓ′ , k, z) if ℓ′ < ℓ
                                                     
                                                     
                                                   ·
                                                     
                                                     g̃p (t − 1, x + ℓ, k, z)
                                                                                       otherwise.

The recurrence for f˜p can now be written as

                                   X k x+ℓ−1
                                         X k − 1
           f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z) =              ′
                                                  g̃1 (t − 1, r, k ′ )h(t, x, ℓ, z, r, k − k ′ ).       (2.1)
                                   k′ =1 r=1
                                             k −1

   Using Equation (2.1), it takes O(n7 ) arithmetic operations to compute all values of
f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z), since there are five arguments and now only a double summation. The cost
of computing h is the same, i.e., O(n7 ) arithmetic operations, since h has six arguments
and a single summation. Therefore, the overall running time of the counting algorithm
is O(n7 ) arithmetic operations.



2.6        Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs

   Using the standard sampling-to-counting reduction of [1], we can use the information
stored in the dynamic-programming tables from our counting algorithm to sample a
uniformly random chordal graph. This sampling algorithm is all that remains to prove
Theorem 1. Before sampling, assume we have already run the counting algorithm from
Section 2.3, and thus we have constant-time access to the counter functions. In other
words, given the name of a counter function and any particular values for its arguments,
we can access the value of that function in constant time.



                                                      68
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                   Chapter 2


Theorem 3 Suppose the counter functions have been precomputed and we have constant-
time access to their values. We can sample uniformly at random from the following classes
of chordal graphs, using O(n4 ) arithmetic operations for each sample:

   1. ω-colorable chordal graphs with vertex set [n]

   2. ω-colorable connected chordal graphs with vertex set [n],

where n, ω ∈ N with ω ≤ n.


     Proof: First, we show that we can sample uniformly at random from the following
classes of chordal graphs: G(t, x, k, z), G(t,
                                          e x, k, z), G
                                                      ep (t, x, k, z), G
                                                                       e1 (t, x, k), G
                                                                                     e≥2 (t, x, k),

F (t, x, ℓ, k), Fe(t, x, ℓ, k), Fep (t, x, ℓ, k), and Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, z), where t, x, ℓ, k, z are any values
in the domains of their respective functions. In the “greater than or equal” direction of
the proof each recurrence in Section 2.5.3, we describe an injective map. For example,
in Lemma 3 we are given 0 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, a graph G1 ∈ G(t,
                                                  e x, k ′ , z), a graph G2 ∈ G(t −

1, x, k − k ′ , z), and a subset A ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size k ′ , and we describe how one can
map this to a graph G ∈ G(t, x, k, z). In each lemma, we also describe an injective map
in the reverse direction (to prove the “less than or equal” direction). Therefore, each of
these injective maps is in fact a bijection.
    Consider any one of the recurrence lemmas proved in Section 2.5.3. Let ψ be the
injective map in the “greater than or equal” direction of the proof, let C1 be the domain
of ψ and let C2 be the target space. Since ψ : C1 → C2 is in fact a bijection, and our goal
is to sample a uniformly random element of C2 (e.g. G(t, x, k, z)), it is sufficient to first
sample a uniformly random element of C1 , and then apply ψ.
    The samplers for each of these graph classes call one another recursively/cyclically
until reaching a base case. The base cases are the same as in the counting algorithm.
Whenever we reach a base case, there is only one possible graph (since the counter

                                                     69
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                    Chapter 2


function equals 1), so we simply output that graph. We never choose a base case where
the counter function equals 0, since the probability of taking such a path in the algorithm
would have been 0.
   To sample a connected chordal graph with vertex set [n], we first choose a random
value of the evaporation time, where each possible time t ∈ [n] has probability propor-
tional to the weight of the corresponding term in the summation for c(n) (see section
Section 2.3.3). Next, we sample a random graph with the chosen evaporation time t
using the sampler for G
                      e1 (t, 0, n).

   At the highest level, to sample a chordal graph with vertex set [n], we use the standard
sampling algorithm that is derived from the injective map in the “greater than or equal”
direction of the proof Lemma 10.
   One can also easily modify any of these samplers to only ouptut ω-colorable chordal
graphs. This does not explicity change the pseudocode at all (see Section 2.8); we simply
adjust the values of some of the base cases of the counting algorithm that are used by
the sampling algorithm.
   The correctness of each of these sampling procedures follows from the correctness of
the counting algorithm. The sampling algorithm terminates by an argument similar to
the proof of termination for the counting algorithm. For the sampling running time, the
bottleneck is the time spent sampling from Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, z). In this procedure, we compute
the triple summation from the recurrence for Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, z), and we call this procedure
at most O(n) times, so the overall cost is O(n4 ) arithmetic operations per sample.
   This completes the proof of Theorem 1. The pseudocode for the sampling algorithm
can be found in Section 2.8.




                                             70
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                 Chapter 2


2.7     Approximate Counting and Sampling of Labeled

        Chordal Graphs

   A split graph is a graph whose vertex set can be partitioned into a clique and an
independent set, with arbitrary edges between the two parts. It is easy to see that
every split graph is chordal. On the other hand, a result by Bender, Richmond, and
Wormald [53] shows that a random n-vertex labeled chordal graph is a split graph with
probability 1 − o(1). There is a relatively simple algorithm that counts the number of
labeled split graphs on n vertices using O(n2 ) arithmetic operations [28]. In fact, we
show that this algorithm can be modified to give an approximate answer using only
O(n log2 (1/ε)) arithmetic operations. By combining this with our (exact) counting and
sampling algorithms for labeled chordal graphs, we obtain efficient algorithms for approx-
imate counting and approximate sampling of labeled chordal graphs. In particular, if n
is large enough (roughly log(1/ε) or larger), then we simply run the split graph count-
ing or sampling algorithm. Otherwise, we run the exact counting or uniform sampling
algorithm for chordal graphs.
   For ε > 0, we say a number A is a (1 + ε)-approximation of a number B if B ≤ A ≤
B(1 + ε), and we say A is a (1 − ε)-approximation of B if B(1 − ε) ≤ A ≤ B. Similarly,
we say A is a (1 ± ε)-approximation of B if B(1 − ε) ≤ A ≤ B(1 + ε).


Theorem 4 There is a deterministic algorithm that given a positive integer n and 0 <
ε < 1 as input, computes a (1 ± ε)-approximation of the number of n-vertex labeled
chordal graphs in O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)) time. Moreover, there is a randomized algorithm
that given the same input, generates a random n-vertex labeled chordal graph according
to a distribution whose total variation distance from the uniform distribution is at most
ε. The expected running time of this randomized algorithm is O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)).

                                            71
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                   Chapter 2


   In the O(n2 ) algorithm for counting split graphs that is described in [28], there is
initially a certain amount of overcounting because of the fact that some split graphs have
more than one valid way of being partitioned into a clique and an independent set. To
account for this, the algorithm in [28] first computes the total number of split graphs
with overcounting, and then it subtracts the value of the redundant terms to obtain the
final answer. This gives an efficient counting algorithm, but this strategy does not lend
itself as well to designing a sampling algorithm.
   For Theorem 4, we wish to obtain not only an approximate counting algorithm, but
also an approximate sampling algorithm. Therefore, we begin by designing a related,
alternative counting algorithm for split graphs that partitions each split graph into three
parts rather than two, using the unique three-part partition from Definition 1.
   For our purposes, it is sufficient to approximately count split graphs, so the algorithm
that we begin with is a (1+ε)-approximate counting algorithm that uses O(n2 ) arithmetic
operations when ε is fixed (see Section 2.7.1). In Section 2.7.2, we then speed this up by
computing only the largest terms of the summation given in Section 2.7.1, to obtain an
approximate counting algorithm for split graphs that uses only O(n log2 (1/ε)) arithmetic
operations. In Section 2.7.3, we design an approximate sampling algorithm for split
graphs. Finally, in Section 2.7.4, we describe the resulting approximate counting and
sampling algorithms for chordal graphs, which proves Theorem 4.


2.7.1     Approximate counting of split graphs

   Let C, I, and Q be the always-clique set, the always-independent set, and the ques-
tioning set, respectively, in a generic split graph (see Definition 1).


Observation 6 For every split graph G, C is a clique and I is an independent set.
Furthermore, every vertex in Q is adjacent to every vertex in C and is non-adjacent to

                                             72
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                          Chapter 2


every vertex in I.

        Proof: Clearly, C is a clique and I is an independent set, since C ⊆ C ′ and I ⊆ I ′
for every split partition (C ′ , I ′ ) of G. For the adjacencies of Q, let v ∈ Q. There exists
some split partition (C ′ , I ′ ) of G that places v in the clique C ′ . Since C ⊆ C ′ , this shows
that v is adjacent to every vertex in C. Similarly, v is non-adjacent to every vertex in I.


       In the proof of the next lemma, P3 denotes a 3-vertex path, and P3 denotes the
complement of a 3-vertex path. We say a graph is P3 -free (resp. P3 -free) if it does not
contain P3 (resp. P3 ) as an induced subgraph.

Lemma 25 The questioning set Q of a split graph G is either a clique or an independent
set.

        Proof: We first observe that G[Q] is P3 -free. To see this, suppose G[Q] contains
some induced path of u, v, w of length 3. Since v ∈ Q, there exists some split partition
(C ′ , I ′ ) of G such that v ∈ I ′ . This means u ∈ C ′ and w ∈ I ′ since (u, v) ∈ E(G)
           / E(G). Therefore, v and w are adjacent and both belong to I ′ , which is a
and (u, w) ∈
contradiction.
       This shows that G[Q] is P3 -free, so every connected component of G[Q] is a clique.
If Q is empty or G[Q] has only one component, we are done. Now we claim that if G[Q]
has at least two components, then Q is an independent set. Suppose to the contrary that
some component of G[Q] contains an edge (u, v), and let w be a vertex in some other
component. The vertices u, w, v form an induced P3 in G[Q]. However, we can see that
G[Q] is P3 -free by an argument similar to the previous paragraph with the roles of C ′
and I ′ reversed, so this is a contradiction.

Lemma 26 In a split graph, if Q is a clique, then every vertex in C has a neighbor in I.
If Q is an independent set, then every vertex in I has a non-neighbor in C.
                                                73
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                    Chapter 2


    Proof: For the case when Q is a clique, suppose there is some vertex v ∈ C that is
not adjacent to any vertex in I. Then (C ∪ Q \ {v}, I ∪ {v}) is a split partition that places
v in the independent set, contradicting the fact that v ∈ C. Therefore, every vertex in C
has a neighbor in I. The proof for the case when Q is an independent set is similar.
   For the case when |Q| ≥ 2, it is easy to exactly compute the number of split graphs.
To do so, we will count the number of split graphs that satisfy the properties described
in the following lemma.

                                                ˆ Q̂} is a partition of V (G) with the
Lemma 27 Suppose G is a graph, and suppose {Ĉ, I,
following properties:

  1. Ĉ is a clique and Iˆ is an independent set

  2. Q̂ is a clique or independent set, and |Q̂| ≥ 2

  3. Every vertex in Q̂ is adjacent to every vertex in Ĉ and is non-adjacent to every
     vertex in Iˆ

  4. If Q̂ is a clique, then every vertex in Ĉ has a neighbor in Iˆ

  5. If Q̂ is an independent set, then every vertex in Iˆ has a non-neighbor in Ĉ.

Then G is a split graph, and furthermore, Ĉ is the always-clique set, Iˆ is the always-
independent set, and Q̂ is the questioning set of G.


   We have already established that the “converse” of this lemma is true: If G is a split
graph with always-clique set, always-independent set, and questioning set equal to C, I,
and Q, with |Q| ≥ 2, then these three sets satisfy properties (1)-(5) of Lemma 27 when
Ĉ = C, Iˆ = I, and Q̂ = Q. This was proved in Observation 6 and Lemmas 25 and 26.
Combined with Lemma 27, this tells us that in order to count split graphs with |Q| ≥ 2,
we simply need to count the number of split graphs (for each given C, I, and Q) that
satisfy properties (1)-(5).


                                             74
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                              Chapter 2


       Proof: [Proof of Lemma 27] Either (Ĉ ∪ Q̂, ˆ
                                                   I) or (Ĉ, Iˆ ∪ Q̂) is a split partition of
G, so G is a clearly a split graph. As usual, let C, I, and Q denote the always-clique
set, always-independent set, and questioning set of G. From now on, we assume Q̂ is a
clique. For the case when Q̂ is an independent set, the argument is similar.
      We first show Q̂ ⊆ Q. Let v ∈ Q̂. The split partition (Ĉ ∪ Q̂, ˆ
                                                                      I) places v in the clique,
and the split partition (Ĉ ∪ Q̂ \ {v}, Iˆ ∪ {v}) places v in the independent set. Therefore,
v ∈ Q.
      Next, we show Ĉ ⊆ C. Suppose there is some v ∈ Ĉ \ C. This means there is some
split partition (C ′ , I ′ ) of G such that v ∈ I ′ . By property (4), v has some neighbor u ∈ ˆ
                                                                                               I,
and we must have u ∈ C ′ . Now choose a vertex q ∈ Q̂ ⊆ Q. By property (3), we have
                         / E(G). This means q cannot belong to I ′ nor C ′ , which is a
(v, q) ∈ E(G) and (u, q) ∈
contradiction.
      To see that Iˆ ⊆ I, let (C ′ , I ′ ) be a split partition of G. Since Q̂ is a clique and |Q̂| ≥ 2,
                                                                                ˆ we know v
there is at least one vertex q̂ ∈ Q̂ that belongs to C ′ . For every vertex v ∈ I,
is not adjacent to q̂, so v ∈ I ′ . Therefore, Iˆ ⊆ I. Since Ĉ, I,
                                                                 ˆ and Q̂ together cover all of
                                   ˆ and Q = Q̂.
V (G), this shows that C = Ĉ, I = I,
      Putting this together, we have a formula that (exactly) counts split graphs with
|Q| ≥ 2.


Lemma 28 Let n ∈ N. The number of split graphs on n vertices with |Q| ≥ 2 is given
by the formula3
                                     n−q  
                                   n X          
                                   X      n n−q
                               2                          (2n−c−q − 1)c .
                                   q=2 c=0
                                             q      c

       Proof: By Lemma 25, Q is either a clique or an independent set. First consider the
case when Q is a clique. Let q and c be integers such that 2 ≤ q ≤ n and 0 ≤ q ≤ n − q.
We wish to count the number of split graphs with |Q| = q, |C| = c, and |I| = n − q − c.
  3
      We use the convention 00 = 1, so the term where q = n and c = 0 is equal to 1.
                                                   75
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                     Chapter 2

            n
              n−q
There are   q    c
                      ways of assigning the labels 1, . . . , n to the sets C, I, and Q, since
once we have chosen the labels for Q and C, the labels in I are known. For each possible
choice of label sets, there are (2n−c−q − 1)c split graphs of this form, since we must choose
a nonempty subset of I be to the neighborhood for each vertex in C. By Observation 6
and Lemmas 25 to 27, this counts exactly the correct set of graphs. Therefore, the
number of split graphs on n vertices in which Q is a clique of size at least 2 is equal to
                              n Xn−q     
                             X        n n−q
                                             (2n−c−q − 1)c .
                             q=2 c=0
                                      q   c

   By symmetry, this is exactly equal to the number of split graphs on n vertices in
which Q is an independent set of size at least 2 (the bijection is given by taking the
complement of each graph). Therefore, the number of split graphs with |Q| ≥ 2 is twice
the above summation.
   We now move to the case when |Q| ≤ 1.


Lemma 29 Consider a split graph with |Q| ≤ 1. In this case, every vertex in C has a
neighbor in I, and every vertex in I has a non-neighbor in C.


    Proof: This follows immediately from Lemma 26.
   We also need a lemma that is analogous to Lemma 27.

                                                ˆ Q̂} is a partition of V (G) with the
Lemma 30 Suppose G is a graph, and suppose {Ĉ, I,
following properties:

  1. Ĉ is a clique and Iˆ is an independent set

  2. |Q̂| ≤ 1

  3. Every vertex in Q̂ is adjacent to every vertex in Ĉ and is non-adjacent to every
     vertex in Iˆ
                                          ˆ and every vertex in Iˆ has a non-neighbor
  4. Every vertex in Ĉ has a neighbor in I,
     in Ĉ.
                                              76
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                        Chapter 2


Then G is a split graph, and furthermore, Ĉ is the always-clique set, Iˆ is the always-
independent set, and Q̂ is the questioning set of G.

                                                                ˆ is a split partition of G.
    Proof: The graph G is clearly a split graph since (Ĉ ∪ Q̂, I)
We also have the split partition (Ĉ, Iˆ ∪ Q̂), so Q̂ ⊆ Q.
   To see that Ĉ ⊆ C, suppose there is some v ∈ Ĉ \ C. This means there is some split
                                                                                         ˆ and
partition (C ′ , I ′ ) of G such that v ∈ I ′ . By property (4), v has some neighbor u ∈ I,
we must have u ∈ C ′ . And again by property (4), u has some non-neighbor w ∈ Ĉ, and
we must have w ∈ I ′ . Since v, w ∈ Ĉ, this means v and w are two adjacent vertices in
I ′ , which is a contradiction. The proof that Iˆ ⊆ I is similar. Therefore, C = Ĉ, I = I,
                                                                                         ˆ

and Q = Q̂.
   For the proof of the following lemma, a two-tone graph is defined as a labeled graph
in which, in addition to the vertex labels, each vertex is colored with one of two colors
(cyan and indigo, for C and I). A three-tone graph is defined similarly, but with three
colors (cyan, indigo, and white, for C, I, and Q).
   Unlike the case when |Q| ≥ 2, property (4) of Lemma 30 now has two neighbor/non-
neighbor conditions that need to be true simultaneously, so it is no longer trivial to exactly
count the number of possibilities. However, we can compute a very close approximation.
                                                                                                  
Lemma 31 If n is sufficiently large, then the following formula gives a           1 + (3/2)1 n/3       -
approximation of the number of split graphs on n vertices with Q = ∅:
                      ⌊n ⌋
                       2                 n−2  
                      X    n   c     n−c
                                           X    n
                             (2 − 1)     +        (2n−c − 1)c .
                      c=2
                           c                n
                                                c
                                              c=⌊ 2 ⌋+1


    Proof: We begin by working with the first summation. Fix an integer k such that
2 ≤ k ≤ n2 . Let T be the set of all two-tone graphs with k cyan vertices and n − k indigo
vertices such that the cyan vertices form a clique, the indigo vertices form an independent

                                             77
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2


set, and every indigo vertex has a non-neighbor among the cyan vertices. The term with
c = k in the above summation counts the number of two-tone graphs in T .
      By Lemmas 29 and 30, the number of n-vertex split graphs with |C| = k and Q = ∅
is equal to number of two-tone graphs in T where it happens that every cyan vertex has
an indigo neighbor. Note that there are no split graphs with |C| ∈ {0, 1} and Q = ∅ since
if all of G is an independent set, then Q = V (G). Now we just need to show that |T | is
approximately the number of split graphs that we wish to count. Suppose we choose a
graph G′ from T uniformly at random. If u ∈ V (G′ ) is a cyan vertex and v ∈ V (G′ ) is an
                                                                             k−1
                                                                             −1
indigo vertex, then the probability that u and v are adjacent in G′ is 2 2k −1  . Therefore,
the probability that a given cyan vertex u does not have an indigo neighbor is
                                             n−k  n−k
                                    2k−1 − 1
                                 
                                                   2
                                  1− k           ≤       ,
                                     2 −1          3

since k ≥ 2. By a union bound, the probability that some cyan vertex u does not have
an indigo neighbor is at most n(2/3)n−k ≤ n(2/3)n/2 since k ≤ n2 .
      Therefore, the value of the summation from c = 2 to ⌊ n2 ⌋ is at most α times the
number of split graphs with Q = ∅ and |C| ≤ |I|, where α is the following value:

                                                    1
                                        α=
                                                        2 n/2
                                                          
                                             1−n        3
                                                       n
                                          =1+         n/2
                                                   3
                                                     
                                                   2
                                                            −n
                                                    1
                                          ≤1+            .
                                                   3 n/3
                                                    
                                                   2

The last inequality holds when n is sufficiently large.4
      Similarly, the value of the summation from c = ⌊ n2 ⌋ + 1 to n − 2 is at most α times the
number of split graphs with Q = ∅ and |C| > |I|. The proof of this is similar, except T
is defined as the set of all two-tone graphs with k cyan vertices and n − k indigo vertices
  4
      A loose bound shows that this lemma holds for n ≥ 61.
                                                  78
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                          Chapter 2


such that the cyan vertices form a clique, the indigo vertices form an independent set,
and every cyan vertex has a neighbor among the indigo vertices. Therefore, the overall
sum is an α-approximation of the number of split graphs with Q = ∅.
                                                                                     
Lemma 32 If n is sufficiently large, then the following formula gives a 1 + (3/2)1 n/3 -
approximation of the number of split graphs on n vertices with |Q| = 1:
               ⌊ n−1
                  2
                     ⌋                               n−2           
                X      n−1                             X           n−1
                    n      (2c − 1)n−c−1 +                      n      (2n−c−1 − 1)c .
                c=2
                        c                                           c
                                                  c=⌊ n−1
                                                       2
                                                          ⌋+1


       Proof: For the first summation, fix an integer k such that 2 ≤ k ≤ n−1
                                                                           2
                                                                              . Let T be the
set of all three-tone graphs with k cyan vertices, n − k − 1 indigo vertices, and one white
vertex, with the following properties: the cyan vertices form a clique, the indigo vertices
form an independent set, the white vertex is adjacent to all of the cyan vertices and
none of the indigo vertices, and every indigo vertex has a non-neighbor among the cyan
vertices. The term with c = k in the above summation counts the number of three-tone
graphs in T . There is now an additional factor of n (compared to the previous lemma)
since there are n possible choices for the label of the white vertex.
      By an argument similar to the previous lemma, the value of the summation from
c = 2 to ⌊ n−1
            2
               ⌋ is at most α times the number of split graphs with |Q| = 1 and |C| ≤ |I|,
where α is the following value:

                                                       1
                                    α=                                 .
                                                           2 (n−1)/2
                                                             
                                         1 − (n − 1)       3

This is the same value as in the previous lemma, except with n − 1 in place of n. As
before, this is bounded above5 by 1 + (3/2)1 n/3 , and the case when |C| > |I| is similar.
   Suppose n is large enough that Lemmas 31 and 32 hold. Computing and adding
                                                                       
together the summations from Lemmas 28, 31 and 32 gives a 1 + (3/2)1 n/3 -approximation
  5
      A loose bound shows that this lemma holds for n ≥ 65.
                                                  79
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                 Chapter 2


for the number of split graphs on n vertices. If n ≥ 3 log3/2 1ε , then this is a (1 + ε)-
approximation.
   The summation from Lemma 28 can be computed using O(n2 ) arithmetic opera-
tions by precomputing all binomial coefficients and precomputing all possible values of
(2n−c−q − 1)c . Similarly, the summations from Lemmas 31 and 32 can also be com-
puted using O(n2 ) operations. Therefore, we have a (1 + ε)-approximation algorithm
for counting split graphs on n vertices that uses O(n2 ) arithmetic operations, for n ≥
max{N1 , 3 log3/2 1ε }, where N1 is a number large enough that Lemmas 31 and 32 hold for
n ≥ N1 .
   This counting algorithm is already well-suited for designing a corresponding sampling
algorithm. However, the running time still has some room for improvement. In the next
section, we describe how to speed up this algorithm by only computing the terms that
dominate the value of each summation, rather than computing all Θ(n2 ) terms.


2.7.2      Faster approximate counting of split graphs

   For the case when |Q| ≥ 2, the term (2n−c−q − 1)c in Lemma 28 is maximized when
q = 2 and c = ⌊ n−2
                 2
                    ⌋. As it turns out, if we wish to compute a (1 − ε)-approximation
of the number of such split graphs, it is sufficient to compute only O(log2 (1/ε)) terms
of the double summation, near the values q = 2 and c = ⌊ n−2
                                                          2
                                                             ⌋. In the following lemma,
we show that we only need to compute O(log(1/ε)) terms of the sum over q. Next, in
Lemma 34, we show that we only need to compute O(log(1/ε)) terms of the sum over c.
   In the next few lemmas we assume |Q| < n, since this will be useful in the proof
of Lemma 34. For the case when |Q| = n, we can easily count the number of split
graphs. There are just two of them: G is either a complete graph or an independent set.
(Lemma 33 also holds for the number of n-vertex split graphs with 2 ≤ |Q| ≤ n, with the


                                            80
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                          Chapter 2


same proof, if we take the sum from q = 2 to min{s, n}, but requiring |Q| < n is more
convenient for the later lemmas.)

Lemma 33 Let 0 < ε < 1 be given. For sufficiently large n, the following formula gives
a (1 − ε)-approximation of the number of split graphs on n vertices with 2 ≤ |Q| < n:
                        min{s,n−1} n−q  
                           X X n n − q
                      2                            (2n−c−q − 1)c ,
                           q=2     c=0
                                        q     c

where s = ⌈10 log 1ε + 37⌉.

     Proof: The number of n-vertex split graphs with 2 ≤ |Q| < n is equal to the formula
from Lemma 28, except with the sum over q going from 2 to n − 1 rather than n. Now,
in the current lemma, we have skipped the terms that go from q = s + 1 to n − 1. We
need to show that their sum is at most ε times the total summation (from 2 to n − 1).
    For simplicity, in this proof we will not write the factor of 2 in front of the double
summation, since including that factor does not change the multiplicative error. In the
following inequality, we use the fact that ⌈ n−2
                                              2
                                                 ⌉⌊ n−2
                                                     2
                                                        ⌋ ≥ ⌈ n−2
                                                               2
                                                                  ⌉(⌊ n−2
                                                                       2
                                                                          ⌋ − 1) + 1 since we
can assume ⌈ n−2
              2
                 ⌉ ≥ 1. The total value of the double summation is bounded below by
the term with q = 2 and c = ⌊ n−2  2
                                       ⌋:
                                                   
         n   n−2        ⌈ n−2 ⌉      ⌊ n−2 ⌋     n − 2  ⌈ n−2 ⌉⌊ n−2 ⌋   ⌈ n−2 ⌉(⌊ n−2 ⌋−1)
                                                                                             
                      (2   2    − 1)    2    ≥              2 2     2   −2   2       2
         2   ⌊ n−2
                2
                   ⌋                            ⌊ n−2
                                                   2
                                                      ⌋
                                                         
                                               1 n − 2 ⌈ n−2 ⌉⌊ n−2 ⌋
                                             ≥             2 2     2
                                               2 ⌊ n−2
                                                     2
                                                        ⌋
                                                         
                                               1 n − 2 ( n−3 )( n−2 )
                                             ≥             2 2     2  .
                                               2 ⌊ n−2
                                                     2
                                                        ⌋
    To prove a bound on the tail (the terms from q = s + 1 to n − 1), we first give a
bound for the inner sum. Suppose 2 ≤ q < n is fixed. As c ranges from 0 to ⌊ n−q
                                                                              2
                                                                                 ⌋, the
product c(n − q − c) increases by at least 1 whenever c increases by 1. Therefore,
              ⌊ n−q
                 2
                    ⌋                     ⌊ n−q
                                             2
                                                ⌋                  ⌊ n−q
                                                                      2
                                                                         ⌋⌈ n−q
                                                                             2
                                                                                ⌉
                                                                                               2
               X                          X                            X
                        (2n−c−q − 1)c ≤             (2n−c−q )c ≤                    2i ≤ 2(n−q) /4+1 .
               c=0                         c=0                         i=0
                                                         81
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                           Chapter 2


Similarly, the same bound holds if we take the same sum from c = ⌈ n−q
                                                                    2
                                                                       ⌉ to n − q, so
                                       n−q
                                                                     2
                                       X
                                             (2n−c−q − 1)c ≤ 2(n−q) /4+2 .
                                       c=0

        n−q                   n−2
                                 
Since    c
                is at most   ⌊ n−2 ⌋
                                        for all values of c and q, this implies
                                2


                      n−q                                          
                      X     n−q               n−c−q      c      n−2             2
                                         (2           − 1) ≤     n−2    · 2(n−q) /4+2 .
                       c=0
                                 c                              ⌊ 2 ⌋

Therefore, we have the following bound on the tail:
 n−1 Xn−q                      n−1              
 X         n n−q    n−c−q     c
                                   X     n    n−2                 2
                  (2      − 1) ≤                n−2       · 2(n−q) /4+2
q=s+1 c=0
           q   c                  q=s+1
                                         q    ⌊ 2 ⌋
                                                              n−1  
                                    n−2       ( n−3 )( n−2
                                                           )−1
                                                                X     n −qn/4+5n/4+3/2
                                ≤    n−2    ·2 2        2                2
                                    ⌊ 2 ⌋                      q=s+1
                                                                       q

since q 2 ≤ qn. We just need to show
                                        n−1  
                                        X    n
                                                      2−qn/4+5n/4+3/2 ≤ ε
                                       q=s+1
                                                 q

                                                             n       1
to conclude that we have a (1 − ε)-approximation. Note that 2n/4 ≤ 2n/10 for n ≥ 34.
Therefore, we can bound this sum as follows:
                       n−1                    n−1
                       X    n −qn/4+5n/4+3/2    X
                              2              ≤       nq · 2−qn/4+5n/4+3/2
                      q=s+1
                            q                  q=s+1
                                                          n−1        q
                                                5n/4+3/2
                                                          X       n
                                             =2
                                                         q=s+1
                                                                 2n/4
                                                          n−1         q
                                                5n/4+3/2
                                                          X        1
                                             ≤2
                                                         q=s+1
                                                                 2n/10
                                                                        2
                                                         ≤ 25n/4+3/2 (s+1)n/10
                                                                    2
                                                         = 25n/4−(s+1)n/10+5/2

                                                         ≤ ε,


                                                         82
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                  Chapter 2


where the last step follows from the definition of s (see the next paragraph for more
details). In the third-to-last step, we assumed n ≥ 10 so that 2qn/10 increases by at least
a factor of 2 each time q increases by 1.
    The last step deserves more explanation since there are several steps contained in it.
Starting from the definition of s, we have
                                       1
                             s = ⌈10 log + 37⌉
                                       ε
                                     1 5       5    s    1
                               =⇒ log + ≤ − +          +
                                     ε 2  4 10 10 
                                     1 5         5    s    1
                               =⇒ log + ≤ − +           +     n
                                     ε 2         4 10 10
                                     1      5n (s + 1)n 5
                               =⇒ log ≤ − +              − .
                                     ε       4     10       2
In the second implication, where we use the fact that 1 ≤ n, we also need − 54 + 10
                                                                                  s   1
                                                                                    + 10 ≥0
for this to work. This is true by the definition of s (since ε ≤ 5).



Lemma 34 Let n, q ∈ N with 2 ≤ q < n, and let 0 < ε < 1 be given. We have the
following approximation:
          min{t2 ,n−q}                             n−q      
             X          n−q     n−c−q     c
                                                     X     n−q
                              (2      − 1) ≥ (1 − ε)             (2n−c−q − 1)c ,
                         c                           c=0
                                                            c
            c=max{0,t1 }

where t1 = ⌊ n−q
              2
                 ⌋ − ⌈log 1ε ⌉ − 2 and t2 = ⌈ n−q
                                               2
                                                  ⌉ + ⌈log 1ε ⌉ + 2.

     Proof: As before, we show that the tail composed of terms we have skipped is at
most ε times the total summation. In the following inequality, we use the fact that
⌈ n−q
   2
      ⌉⌊ n−q
          2
             ⌋ ≥ ⌈ n−q
                    2
                       ⌉(⌊ n−q
                            2
                               ⌋ − 1) + 1 since q < n. The total value of the summation is
bounded below by the term with c = ⌊ n−q      2
                                                  ⌋:
                                                    
          n−q         ⌈ n−q ⌉      ⌊ n−q
                                         ⌋     n − q  ⌈ n−q ⌉⌊ n−q ⌋     ⌈ n−q ⌉(⌊ n−q ⌋−1)
                                                                                             
                    (2   2    − 1)    2    ≥               2 2   2     − 2   2       2
          ⌊ n−q
             2
                ⌋                              ⌊ n−q ⌋
                                              2         
                                             1 n − q ⌈ n−q ⌉⌊ n−q ⌋
                                           ≥              2 2    2   .
                                             2 ⌊ n−q 2
                                                       ⌋
                                                   83
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                          Chapter 2


   For the bound on the tail, we start with the upper end of the tail where c > t2 . We
have
     n−q                                ⌊ n−q
                                             2
                                                ⌋                   
     X     n−q                             X                   n−q       n−q         n−q
                (2n−c−q − 1)c =                               n−q     (2⌊ 2 ⌋−∆ − 1)⌈ 2 ⌉+∆ ,
    c=t +1
            c                                                ⌈ 2 ⌉+∆
         2                          ∆=t2 +1−⌈ n−q
                                               2
                                                  ⌉


where ∆ = c − ⌈ n−q
                 2
                    ⌉. We have (⌊ n−q
                                   2
                                      ⌋ − ∆)(⌈ n−q
                                                2
                                                   ⌉ + ∆) ≤ ⌊ n−q
                                                               2
                                                                  ⌋⌈ n−q
                                                                      2
                                                                         ⌉ − ∆2 since ∆ ≥ 0.
Therefore,

           n−q                                             ⌊ n−q
                                                                  2
                                                                     ⌋
           X     n−q                    n−q                    X               n−q             n−q
                      (2 n−c−q     c
                               − 1) ≤                                       2(⌊ 2 ⌋−∆)(⌈ 2 ⌉+∆)
          c=t +1
                  c                    ⌈ n−q
                                          2
                                             ⌉
             2                                           ∆=t2 +1−⌈ n−q
                                                                    2
                                                                       ⌉

                                                                            ⌊ n−q
                                                                                 2
                                                                                    ⌋
                                           n−q           ⌊ n−q ⌋⌈ n−q ⌉
                                                                               X                     2
                                     ≤             2        2      2                        2−∆
                                           ⌈ n−q
                                              2
                                                 ⌉
                                                                          ∆=t2 +1−⌈ n−q
                                                                                     2
                                                                                        ⌉

                                                                                   ⌊ n−q
                                                                                        2
                                                                                           ⌋
                                       1 n − q ⌊ n−q ⌋⌈ n−q ⌉                           X                2
                                     =            2 2    2    ·2                                     2−∆ .
                                       2 ⌈ n−q
                                            2
                                               ⌉
                                                                               ∆=t2 +1−⌈ n−q
                                                                                          2
                                                                                             ⌉

         q
If t ≥    log 8ε , then
                                          ∞
                                          X      2 ε
                                      2       2−∆ ≤ .
                                          ∆=t
                                                   2
                                                                    q
When t2 is defined as above, we have t2 + 1 − ⌈ n−q
                                                 2
                                                    ⌉≥                   log 8ε , so the value of the upper
end of the tail is at most 2ε times the total summation (since 8ε ≤ 1).
   Similarly, to bound the lower end of the tail, the same argument holds if we let
∆ = c−⌊ n−q
         2
            ⌋. In this case, we use the fact that (⌈ n−q
                                                      2
                                                         ⌉−∆)(⌊ n−q
                                                                 2
                                                                    ⌋+∆) ≤ ⌈ n−q
                                                                              2
                                                                                 ⌉⌊ n−q
                                                                                     2
                                                                                        ⌋−∆2
since ∆ ≤ 0. (This is the inequality that we need since we are now using a floor rather
than a ceiling in the definition of ∆.) The lower end of the tail is at most 2ε times the
                                                q
total summation as long as |t1 − 1 − ⌊ n−q
                                        2
                                           ⌋| ≥   log 8ε , which is true by the definition of
t1 . Thus the sum of both tails is at most 2ε + 2ε = ε times the total summation.
   Combining Lemmas 33 and 34 with 2ε in place of ε and using the fact that (1 − 2ε )2 ≥
1 − ε, we immediately obtain the following:
                                                84
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                          Chapter 2


Lemma 35 Let 0 < ε < 1 be given. For sufficiently large n, the following formula gives
a (1 − ε)-approximation of the number of split graphs on n vertices with 2 ≤ |Q| < n:
                            min{s,n−1} min{t2 ,n−q}       
                               X          X           n n−q
                        2                                     (2n−c−q − 1)c ,
                               q=2
                                                      q    c
                                       c=max{0,t1 }

where s = ⌈10 log 1ε + 47⌉, t1 = ⌊ n−q
                                    2
                                       ⌋ − ⌈log 1ε ⌉ − 3, and t2 = ⌈ n−q
                                                                      2
                                                                         ⌉ + ⌈log 1ε ⌉ + 3.

    For the case when |Q| ≤ 1, we can prove similar statements. As above, let N1 be
large enough that Lemmas 31 and 32 hold for n ≥ N1 .

Lemma 36 Let 0 < ε < 1 be given. If n ≥ max{N1 , 3 log3/2 1ε }, then the following
formula gives a (1 ± ε)-approximation of the number of split graphs on n vertices with
Q = ∅:
                         n
                        ⌊2⌋                      min{t2 ,n−2}  
                        X          n   c     n−c
                                                      X          n
                                     (2 − 1)     +                  (2n−c − 1)c ,
                                   c                    n
                                                                 c
                   c=max{2,t1 }                              c=⌊ 2 ⌋+1

where t1 = ⌊ n2 ⌋ − ⌈log 1ε ⌉ − 2 and t2 = ⌈ n2 ⌉ + ⌈log 1ε ⌉ + 2.

     Proof: As we saw in the previous section, when n ≥ max{N1 , 3 log3/2 1ε }, the summa-
tion in Lemma 31 is a (1 + ε)-approximation of the number of n-vertex split graphs with
Q = ∅. Therefore, we just need to show that the summation in this lemma (Lemma 36)
is a (1 − ε)-approximation of the summation from Lemma 31.
    In the following inequality, we use the fact that ⌊ n2 ⌋⌈ n2 ⌉ ≥ ⌊ n2 ⌋(⌈ n2 ⌉ − 1) + 1 since
n ≥ 2. The total value of the summation in this lemma is bounded below by the term
with c = ⌊ n2 ⌋:
                                                   
                        n        ⌊n ⌋     ⌈n ⌉     n     ⌊n  ⌋⌈ n ⌉   ⌊ n ⌋(⌈ n ⌉−1)
                                                                                     
                              (2  2   − 1) 2   ≥        2  2    2 − 2 2       2
                      ⌊ n2 ⌋                      ⌊n⌋
                                                  2 
                                                 1 n       n    n
                                               ≥     n  2⌊ 2 ⌋⌈ 2 ⌉ .
                                                 2 ⌊2⌋

    The upper end of the tail (where c ≥ ⌊ n2 ⌋ + 1) and the lower end of the tail (where
c ≤ ⌊ n2 ⌋) are both at most 2ε times the total summation by an argument similar to the
                                                        85
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                      Chapter 2


proof of Lemma 34 with q = 0. Indeed, it does not make a difference that the lower end
of the tail contains the term (2c − 1)n−c rather than (2n−c − 1)c since both of these are
bounded above by 2c(n−c) . Therefore, the sum of both tails is at most ε times the total
summation.

Lemma 37 Let 0 < ε < 1 be given. If n ≥ max{N1 , 3 log3/2 1ε }, then the following
formula gives a (1 ± ε)-approximation of the number of split graphs on n vertices with
|Q| = 1:
              ⌊ n−1
                 2
                    ⌋                          min{t2 ,n−2}    
              X              n−1    c    n−c−1
                                                    X          n−1
                          n       (2 − 1)      +             n     (2n−c−1 − 1)c ,
                              c                      n−1
                                                                c
           c=max{2,t1 }                                c=⌊       ⌋+1
                                                             2


where t1 = ⌊ n2 ⌋ − ⌈log 1ε ⌉ − 2 and t2 = ⌈ n2 ⌉ + ⌈log 1ε ⌉ + 2.

     Proof: As in the previous lemma, we just need to show that the summation in this
lemma is a (1 − ε)-approximation of the summation from Lemma 32. For simplicity, we
will not write the factor of n in front of each summation, since including that factor does
not change the multiplicative error. We know ⌊ n−1
                                                2
                                                   ⌋⌈ n−1
                                                       2
                                                          ⌉ ≥ ⌊ n−1
                                                                 2
                                                                    ⌋(⌈ n−1
                                                                         2
                                                                            ⌉ − 1) + 1 since
n ≥ 3. The total value of the summation in this lemma is bounded below by the term
with c = ⌊ n−1
            2
               ⌋, which is at most
                                                
                                       1 n − 1 ⌊ n−1 ⌋⌈ n−1 ⌉
                                                   2 2   2
                                       2 ⌊ n−1
                                            2
                                               ⌋

by an argument similar to the previous lemma with n − 1 in place of n.
    The upper end of the tail (where c ≥ ⌊ n−1
                                            2
                                               ⌋ + 1) and the lower end of the tail (where
c ≤ ⌊ n−1
       2
          ⌋) are both at most 2ε times the total summation by an argument similar to the
proof of Lemma 34 with q = 1. Therefore, the sum of both tails is at most ε times the
total summation.
    Let N2 be large enough that Lemma 35 holds for n ≥ N2 . We define the function f
as follows: f (ε) = max{N1 , N2 , 3 log3/2 (1/ε)}.
                                                  86
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                       Chapter 2


Lemma 38 Given 0 < ε < 1 and n ≥ f (ε), there is an algorithm that computes a (1±ε)-
approximation of the number of n-vertex labeled split graphs in O(n3 log n log2 (1/ε)) time.

    Proof: Algorithm. Let s be the total obtained from adding together the summa-
tions from Lemmas 35, 36, and 37. Return s + 2.

   Correctness. There are exactly two split graphs with |Q| = n, so by Lemmas 35
to 37, s + 2 is a (1 ± ε)-approximation of the number of n-vertex split graphs.

   Running time. Let the intervals of values of q and c in the summation from
Lemma 35 be called Iq := {2, . . . , min{s, n − 1}} and Ic := {max{0, t1 }, . . . , min{t2 , n −
q}}. For each q ∈ Iq , c ∈ Ic , we can compute (2n−c−q −1)c using repeated squaring, which
takes O(log n) arithmetic operations. Each of the binomial coefficients can be computed
in O(n) operations using the formula ab = b!(a−b)!
                                              a!
                                       
                                                   . Therefore, we can compute the sum-
mation from Lemma 35 using O(n|Iq ||Ic |) = O(n log2 (1/ε)) operations. Similarly, the
summations from Lemmas 36 and 37 can be computed using O(n log(1/ε)) operations.
Thus the overall running time is O(n log2 (1/ε)) arithmetic operations. Since each num-
ber in this algorithm can be stored in O(n2 ) bits, this amounts to a running time of
O(n3 log n log2 (1/ε)) in the RAM model.
   Interestingly, the factor of n in the running time of Lemma 38 only comes from
computing the binomial coefficients. If one were to precompute the binomial coefficients,
then the rest of the computation would only take O(log n log2 (1/ε)) arithmetic operations.


2.7.3     Approximate sampling of split graphs

   The approximate counting algorithm from the previous section (Lemma 38) can nat-
urally be extended to give an approximate sampling algorithm that works for n ≥ f ( 2ε ).
Recall that Iq = {2, . . . , min{s, n−1}} and Ic = {max{0, t1 }, . . . , min{t2 , n−q}}. For the
sampling algorithm, we consider choosing a random number in [0, 1) to be one operation.
                                              87
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                    Chapter 2


Lemma 39 Given 0 < ε < 1 and n ≥ f ( 2ε ), there is an algorithm that samples a random
n-vertex labeled split graph according to a distribution whose total variation distance from
the uniform distribution is at most ε. The expected running time of this algorithm is
O(n3 log n log2 (1/ε)).


     Proof: Algorithm. First, we run the counting algorithm from Lemma 38 with input
(n, ε′ ), where ε′ = min{ 2ε , 13 }. Let s + 2 be the output of this algorithm.
   We randomly choose one of the following four cases — Q = ∅, |Q| = 1, 2 ≤ |Q| < n,
or |Q| = n — with probabilities given by the computed summations. For example, the
probability with which we choose Q = ∅ is the value of the summation from Lemma 36
                                                                     2
divided by s + 2, and the probability with which we choose Q = n is s+2 .
   |Q| = n: In this case, we return an n-vertex complete graph with probability 12 , and
otherwise we return an n-vertex independent set.
   2 ≤ |Q| < n: In this case, we choose a random pair (q ′ , c′ ) ∈ Iq × Ic , where each pair
(q, c) has probability proportional to the weight of the (q, c) term in the summation from
Lemma 35. We then sample a uniformly random n-vertex split graph with |Q| = q ′ and
|C| = c′ (by following the proof of Lemma 28), and we return this graph.
   Q = ∅: In this case, we choose a random value of c, say c′ , from the values summed
over in Lemma 36, where each value of c has probability proportional to the weight of
the corresponding term in the summation. We sample a two-tone graph G uniformly
at random from those with c′ cyan vertices, n − c′ indigo vertices, and the following
properties: (1) the cyan vertices form a clique; (2) the indigo vertices form an independent
set; and (3) if c′ ≤ n2 , then every indigo vertex has a non-neighbor among the cyan
vertices; otherwise, every cyan vertex has a neighbor among the indigo vertices. We then
check whether every cyan vertex in G has an indigo neighbor if c′ ≤ n2 , and otherwise
we check whether every indigo vertex has a cyan non-neighbor (call this property P ).

                                               88
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                   Chapter 2


If G satisfies property P , then we return G (without colors). Otherwise, we go back to
the second paragraph of the algorithm (to again choose between the four possible cases
for |Q|).
   |Q| = 1: Similarly, in this case we choose a random value of c, say c′ , from the values
summed over in Lemma 37, where each value of c has probability proportional to the
weight of the corresponding term in the summation. We sample a three-tone graph G
uniformly at random from those with c′ cyan vertices, n − c′ − 1 indigo vertices, one
white vertex, and the following properties: (1) the cyan vertices form a clique; (2) the
indigo vertices form an independent set; (3) the white vertex is adjacent to all of the
cyan vertices and none of the indigo vertices; and (4) if c′ ≤ n−1
                                                                2
                                                                   , then every indigo
vertex has a non-neighbor among the cyan vertices; otherwise, every cyan vertex has a
neighbor among the indigo vertices. We then check whether every cyan vertex in G has
an indigo neighbor if c′ ≤ n−1
                            2
                               , and otherwise we check whether every indigo vertex has
a cyan non-neighbor (call this property P ). If G satisfies property P , then we return G
(without colors). Otherwise, we go back to the second paragraph of the algorithm.

   Correctness. Let s′ be the number of split graphs computed by the approximate
counting algorithm of Lemma 38 (with the given error bound being ε′ ), except we do not
count the graphs that fail to satisfy property P (so s′ is at most s + 2). By Lemma 38,
s + 2 is a (1 ± 2ε )-approximation of the number of n-vertex split graphs. The number of
graphs that are counted by this lemma but do not satisfy property P is at most 2ε times
the number of n-vertex split graphs, so s′ is a (1 − ε)-approximation of the number of
n-vertex split graphs.
   The sampling algorithm never outputs a non-split graph or any graph that does not
satisfy property P . Furthermore, the probabilities of all of the choices of |Q| and c = |C|
are designed so that all output graphs are equally likely, since these probabilities are


                                            89
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                        Chapter 2


based on the summations from the counting algorithm. Therefore, for every split graph
G, if the probability that we output G is nonzero, then the probability that we output G
is in fact 1/s′ . (We know s′ ̸= 0 since 1 − ε > 0 and the number of n-vertex split graphs
is nonzero for all n.) Since s′ is a (1 − ε)-approximation of the number of n-vertex split
graphs, this implies that the total variation distance between the output distribution and
the uniform distribution on split graphs is at most ε.

   Running time. When we say one “iteration” of the algorithm, this refers to building
a graph and then checking whether property P holds for that graph. First, we show that
the expected number of iterations is O(1). If property P does not hold for the current
graph, then we call this a “failure.” Each time we check property P , the probability of
               ′
failure is s+2−s
            s+2
                 . Let ŝ be the exact number of n-vertex split graphs. We have s + 2 − s′ ≤
                                                                                              ′
ε′ · ŝ ≤ ε′ ( 1−ε
               s+2                ′                                                       ε
                  ′ ) since (1 − ε )ŝ ≤ s + 2, so the probability of failure is at most 1−ε′ .


Therefore, the expected number of iterations is at most

                                              1
                                                ε′
                                                     ,
                                           1 − 1−ε ′


which is at most 2, since ε′ ≤ 31 .
   Initially, the counting algorithm takes O(n3 log n log2 (1/ε)) time. Now we just need
to bound the running time of each iteration of the algorithm after that. An iteration
with |Q| = n takes O(n2 ) time. For the case when 2 ≤ |Q| < n, let s2 be the value of the
summation from Lemma 35, and for each pair (q, c) ∈ Iq × Ic , let t(q,c) denote the (q, c)
term in that summation. We can choose a random pair (q ′ , c′ ) in the following way. First,
we choose a random number r ∈ [0, 1). Next, we iterate over all pairs (q, c) ∈ Iq × Ic . For
each of these, we subtract t(q,c) /s2 from r and then check whether r < 0. When r < 0 for
the first time, we let (q ′ , c′ ) be the current pair (q, c). This process takes O(n log2 (1/ε))
arithmetic operations. At this point, we need to generate a random split graph with
|Q| = q ′ and |C| = c′ . This can be done in O(n2 ) time in the following way. We assign
                                               90
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                    Chapter 2


random labels to the sets C, I, and Q in O(n) time. Next, for each vertex in C, we choose
its neighborhood by repeatedly choosing a random subset of I until that subset happens
to be nonempty. The expected number of attempts for this is at most 2, and each attempt
takes O(n) time for a given vertex in C. Therefore, for one iteration in the case when
2 ≤ |Q| < n, the expected running time is O(n log2 (1/ε)) arithmetic operations plus
O(n2 ) basic operations. Similarly, for an iteration with Q = ∅ or |Q| = 1, the expected
running time is O(n log(1/ε)) arithmetic operations plus O(n2 ) basic operations. This
amounts to a running time of O(n3 log n log2 (1/ε) + n2 ) = O(n3 log n log2 (1/ε)) in the
RAM model.


2.7.4     Proof of Theorem 4: Approximate counting and sampling

          of chordal graphs

   A random n-vertex chordal graph is a split graph with probability 1 − o(1). More
precisely, we have the following result:

                                                   √
Proposition 1 (Bender et al. [53]) If β >           3/2, n is sufficiently large, and G is a
random n-vertex labeled chordal graph, then

                             Pr(G is a split graph) > 1 − β n .


   Let N3 be large enough that Proposition 1 holds for n ≥ N3 . As above, let N1 and
N2 be large enough that Lemmas 31 and 32 hold for n ≥ N1 and Lemma 35 holds for
n ≥ N2 . We define the function g as follows:

                   g(ε) = max{N1 , N2 , N3 , log10/9 (2/ε), 3 log3/2 (2/ε)}.

We are now ready to describe the approximate counting and sampling algorithms for
Theorem 4.
                                              91
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                        Chapter 2


   Approximate counting algorithm. We are given n and ε as input. If n < g(ε),
then let z be the (exact) number of n-vertex chordal graphs computed by the counting
algorithm from Theorem 1. Otherwise, we run the approximate split graph counting
algorithm from Lemma 38 with input (n, 2ε ) to obtain a (1 ± 2ε )-approximation of the
number of n-vertex split graphs, and let z be this value. Return z.

   Correctness and running time analysis (counting). To prove correctness, we
need to check that we achieve the desired approximation ratio. This is clearly true
if n < g(ε) since in this case we output the exact answer. Now suppose n ≥ g(ε).
                           9
By Proposition 1 with β = 10 , the (exact) number of n-vertex split graphs is a (1 − 2ε )-
approximation of the number n-vertex of chordal graphs since n ≥ max{N3 , log10/9 (2/ε)}.
The approximate counting algorithm from Lemma 38 computes a (1 ± 2ε )-approximation
of the number of n-vertex split graphs since n ≥ max{N1 , N2 , 3 log3/2 (2/ε)}. Therefore,
z is a (1 ± ε)-approximation of the number of chordal graphs.
   For the running time, if n < g(ε), then the algorithm uses O(log7 (1/ε)) arithmetic
operations, so in this case the running time is O(n2 log n log7 (1/ε)). Otherwise, the
running time is O(n3 log n log2 (1/ε)) by Lemma 38, so the overall running time is at
most O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)).

   Approximate sampling algorithm. We are given n and ε as input. If n < g( 2ε ),
then let G be a uniformly random chordal graph generated by the sampling algorithm
from Theorem 1. Otherwise, let G be a random split graph generated by the sampling
algorithm from Lemma 39 with input (n, 2ε ). Return G.

   Correctness and running time analysis (sampling). We need to show that the
total variation distance between the output distribution and the uniform distribution is
at most ε. This is clearly true if n < g( 2ε ) since in this case the total variation distance is
0. For the case when n ≥ g( 2ε ), let us first compare the uniform distribution over n-vertex

                                               92
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                     Chapter 2


split graphs to the uniform distribution over n-vertex chordal graphs. The total variation
distance between these two distributions is equal to the number of non-split n-vertex
chordal graphs divided by the total number of n-vertex chordal graphs. By Proposition 1,
this is at most 2ε since n ≥ max{N3 , log10/9 (2/ε)}. Since n ≥ max{N1 , N2 , 3 log3/2 (4/ε)},
the approximate sampling algorithm from Lemma 39 samples a random n-vertex labeled
split graph according to a distribution whose total variation distance from uniform (over
split graphs) is at most 2ε . Therefore, by the triangle inequality, the total variation
distance between the output distribution and the uniform distribution over n-vertex
chordal graphs is at most ε.
   For the running time, if n < g( 2ε ), then the algorithm has a worst-cast running time
bound of O(log7 (1/ε)) arithmetic operations, i.e., O(n2 log n log7 (1/ε)) time. Otherwise,
the running time is O(n3 log n log2 (1/ε)) by Lemma 39, so the overall running time is at
most O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)).

   This completes the proof of Theorem 4.


Remark 1 We believe the running time of O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)) can be improved by stor-
ing only a truncated number digits of each number in the intermediate calculations.



2.8      Pseudocode for the Sampling Algorithm

   The procedure Sample Chordal(n) returns a uniformly random chordal graph
with vertex set [n], and Sample Conn Chordal(n) returns a uniformly random con-
nected chordal graph with vertex set [n]. To sample from G(t, x, k, z), etc., one calls
Sample G(t, x, k, z), etc. Recall that ϕ(A, B) is the bijection defined in Section 1.5,
which maps the smallest element of A to the smallest element of B, and so on.



                                             93
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time              Chapter 2


Algorithm 1 Chordal graph sampler
 1: procedure Sample Chordal(n)
 2:    if n = 0 then                                                      ▷ Base case
 3:        Let G be the empty graph with vertex set ∅ and edge set ∅
 4:        return G
 5:    end if
 6:
 7:    Choose k∈ [n] at random such that k = k ′ with probability
              n−1
              k′ −1
                    c(k ′ )a(n − k ′ )/a(n) for each k ′ ∈ [n]
 8:    G1 ← Sample Conn Chordal(k)
 9:    G2 ← Sample Chordal(n − k)
10:    Choose a uniformly random subset C ⊆ [n] of size k containing 1
11:    D ← [n] \ C
12:    Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([k], C) to its label set
13:    Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([n − k], D) to its label set
14:    Let G be the union of G1 and G2
15:    return G
16: end procedure




 1: procedure Sample Conn Chordal(n)
 2:    Choose t ∈ [n] at random such that t = t′ with probability
           g̃1 (t′ , 0, n)/c(n) for each t′ ∈ [n]
 3:    G ← Sample G        e1 (t, 0, n)
 4:    return G
 5: end procedure




 1: procedure Sample G     e1 (t, x, k)
 2:    Choose ℓ ∈ [k] at random such that ℓ = ℓ′ with probability
              k
              f (t, x, ℓ′ , k − ℓ′ )/g̃1 (t, x, k) for each ℓ′ ∈ [k]
              ℓ′
 3:    G ← Sample F (t, x, ℓ, k − ℓ)
 4:    Choose a uniformly random subset L ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size ℓ
 5:    A ← [x + 1, x + k] \ L
 6:    Relabel G by applying ϕ([x+1, x+ℓ], L) to the labels in [x+1, x+ℓ] and applying
           ϕ([x + ℓ + 1, x + k], A) to the labels in [x + ℓ + 1, x + k]
 7:    return G
 8: end procedure




                                                    94
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                          Chapter 2


 1: procedure Glue(G1 , G2 , Y )
 2:    Glue G1 and G2 together at Y , and let G be the resulting graph
 3:    return G
 4: end procedure




 1: procedure Sample F (t, x, ℓ, k)
 2:    if t = 1 and k = 0 then                                                        ▷ Base case
 3:        Let G be a complete graph with vertex set [x + ℓ]
 4:        return G
 5:    end if
 6:
 7:    Choosek ′ ∈ [k] at random such that k ′ = k ′′ with probability
              k
             k′′
                 f˜(t, x, ℓ, k ′′ )g(t − 2, x + ℓ, k − k ′′ , x)/f (t, x, ℓ, k) for each k ′′ ∈ [k]
 8:     G1 ← Sample Fe(t, x, ℓ, k ′ )
 9:     G2 ← Sample G(t − 2, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x)
10:     Choose a uniformly random subset A ⊆ [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] of size k ′
11:     B ← [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] \ A
12:     Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x+ℓ+1, x+ℓ+k ′ ], A) to the labels in [x+ℓ+1, x+ℓ+k ′ ]
13:     Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ], B) to the labels in [x + ℓ +
    1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ]
14:     G ← Glue(G1 , G2 , [x + ℓ])
15:     return G
16: end procedure




                                                95
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                       Chapter 2


 1: procedure Sample G(t, x, k, z)
 2:    if t = 0 and k = 0 then                                                      ▷ Base case
 3:        Let G be a complete graph with vertex set [x]
 4:        return G
 5:    end if
 6:
 7:    Choosek ′ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , k} at random such that k ′ = k ′′ with probability
              k
               g̃(t, x, k ′′ , z)g(t − 1, x, k − k ′′ , z)/g(t, x, k, z) for each 0 ≤ k ′′ ≤ k
             k′′
 8:    G1 ← Sample G(t,    e x, k ′ , z)
 9:    G2 ← Sample G(t − 1, x, k − k ′ , z)
10:    Choose a uniformly random subset A ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size k ′
11:    B ← [x + 1, x + k] \ A
12:    Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k ′ ], A) to the labels in [x + 1, x + k ′ ]
13:    Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k − k ′ ], B) to the labels in [x + 1, x + k − k ′ ]
14:    G ← Glue(G1 , G2 , [x])
15:    return G
16: end procedure




                                              96
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                           Chapter 2


 1: procedure Sample G(t,  e x, k, z)
 2:    if k = 0 then                                                                   ▷ Base case
 3:        Let G be a complete graph with vertex set [x]
 4:        return G
 5:    end if
 6:
 7:    Choose k ′ ∈ [k], x′ ∈ [x] at random such that (k ′ , x′ ) = (k ′′ , x′′ ) with probability
                          
               x     z   k−1
                   −              g̃1 (t, x′′ , k ′′ )g̃(t, x, k − k ′′ , z)/g̃(t, x, k, z)
               x′′   x′′ k ′′ − 1

           for each pair (k ′′ , x′′ ) ∈ [k] × [x]
 8:    G1 ← Sample G     e1 (t, x′ , k ′ )
 9:    G2 ← Sample G(t,  e x, k − k ′ , z)
10:    Choose a uniformly random subset X ′ ⊆ [x] of size x′ such that X ′ ̸⊆ [z]
11:    Choose a uniformly random subset C ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size k ′ containing x + 1
12:    D ← [x + 1, x + k] \ C
13:    Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x′ ], X ′ ) to the labels in [x′ ] and applying
           ϕ([x′ + 1, x′ + k ′ ], C) to the labels in [x′ + 1, x′ + k ′ ]
14:    Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k − k ′ ], D) to the labels in [x + 1, x + k − k ′ ]
15:    G ← Glue(G1 , G2 , X ′ )
16:    return G
17: end procedure




                                                97
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                            Chapter 2


 1: procedure Sample F       e(t, x, ℓ, k)
 2:    S1 ← f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k)
        S2 ← kk′ =1 kk′ g̃1 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ )f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k − k ′ )
              P           
 3:
        S3 ← kk′ =1 kk′ g̃≥2 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ )g̃p (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x)
              P           
 4:
 5:     Choose i ∈ [f˜(t, x, ℓ, k)] uniformly at random
 6:     if i ≤ S1 then
 7:         G ← Sample Fep (t, x, ℓ, k)
 8:         return G
 9:     else if i ≤ S1 + S2 then
10:         Choose k′ ∈ [k] at random such that k ′ = k ′′ with probability
                    k
                       g̃ (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′′ )f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k − k ′′ )/S2 for each k ′′ ∈ [k]
                   k′′ 1
11:         G1 ← Sample G      e1 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ )
12:         G2 ← Sample Fep (t, x, ℓ, k − k ′ )
13:     else
14:         Choose k′ ∈ [k] at random such that k ′ = k ′′ with probability
                    k
                       g̃ (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′′ )g̃p (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′′ , x)/S3 for each k ′′ ∈ [k]
                   k′′ ≥2
15:         G1 ← Sample G      e≥2 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ )
16:         G2 ← Sample G      ep (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k ′ , x)
17:     end if
18:     Choose a uniformly random subset A ⊆ [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] of size k ′
19:     B ← [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] \ A
20:     Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x+ℓ+1, x+ℓ+k ′ ], A) to the labels in [x+ℓ+1, x+ℓ+k ′ ]
21:     Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ], B) to the labels in [x + ℓ +
    1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ]
22:     G ← Glue(G1 , G2 , [x + ℓ])
23:     return G
24: end procedure




                                                 98
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                       Chapter 2


 1: procedure Sample G
                     e≥2 (t, x, k)
       S1 ← k−1         k−1                 ′                  ′
             P               
 2:             k′ =1 k′ −1 g̃1 (t, x, k )g̃1 (t, x, k − k )
             Pk−1 k−1 
 3:    S2 ← k′ =1 k′ −1 g̃1 (t, x, k ′ )g̃≥2 (t, x, k − k ′ )
 4:    Choose i ∈ [g̃≥2 (t, x, k)] uniformly at random
 5:    if i ≤ S1 then
 6:        Choose k ′ ∈ [k] at random such that k = k ′′ with probability
                   k−1
                         g̃ (t, x, k ′′ )g̃1 (t, x, k − k ′′ )/S1 for each k ′′ ∈ [k]
                   k′ −1 1
 7:        G1 ← Sample G        e1 (t, x, k ′ )
 8:        G2 ← Sample G        e1 (t, x, k − k ′ )
 9:    else
10:        Choose k ′ ∈ [k] at random such that k = k ′′ with probability
                   k−1
                         g̃ (t, x, k ′ )g̃≥2 (t, x, k − k ′ )/S2 for each k ′′ ∈ [k]
                   k′ −1 1
11:        G1 ← Sample G        e1 (t, x, k ′ )
12:        G2 ← Sample G        e≥2 (t, x, k − k ′ )
13:    end if
14:    Choose a uniformly random subset C ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size k ′ containing x + 1
15:    D ← [x + 1, x + k] \ C
16:    Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k ′ ], C) to the labels in [x + 1, x + k ′ ]
17:    Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k − k ′ ], D) to the labels in [x + 1, x + k − k ′ ]
18:    G ← Glue(G1 , G2 , [x])
19:    return G
20: end procedure




                                              99
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                              Chapter 2


 1: procedure Sample G      ep (t, x, k, z)
 2:    if k = 0 then                                                                    ▷ Base case
 3:        Let G be a complete graph with vertex set [x]
 4:        return G
 5:    end if
 6:
 7:    Choose k ′ ∈ [k], x′ ∈ [x−1] at random such that (k ′ , x′ ) = (k ′′ , x′′ ) with probability
                          
               x     z   k−1
                   −              g̃1 (t, x′′ , k ′′ )g̃p (t, x, k − k ′′ , z)/g̃p (t, x, k, z)
               x′′   x′′ k ′′ − 1

               for each pair (k ′′ , x′′ ) ∈ [k] × [x − 1]
 8:        G1 ← Sample G    e1 (t, x′ , k ′ )
 9:        G2 ← Sample G    ep (t, x, k − k ′ , z)
10:        Choose a uniformly random subset X ′ ⊆ [x] of size x′ such that X ′ ̸⊆ [z]
11:        Choose a uniformly random subset C ⊆ [x + 1, x + k] of size k ′ containing x + 1
12:        D ← [x + 1, x + k] \ C
13:        Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x′ ], X ′ ) to the labels in [x′ ] and applying ϕ([x′ + 1, x′ +
    k ′ ], C)
               to the labels in [x′ + 1, x′ + k ′ ]
14:        Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + k − k ′ ], D) to the labels in [x + 1, x + k − k ′ ]
15:        G ← Glue(G1 , G2 , X ′ )
16:        return G
17: end procedure




 1: procedure Sample F
                     ep (t, x, ℓ, k)                                 ▷ Four arguments, without z
 2:    return Sample Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, x)
 3: end procedure




                                                 100
Counting and Sampling Labeled Chordal Graphs in Polynomial Time                                   Chapter 2


 1: procedure Sample F    ep W ith Z(t, x, ℓ, k, z)                ▷ Five arguments, including z
               ′        ′                      ′
 2:    Choose k ∈ [k], x ∈ {0, 1, . . . , x}, ℓ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , ℓ} at random such that
             0 < x′ + ℓ′ < x + ℓ and such that (k ′ , x′ , ℓ′ ) = (k ′′ , x′′ , ℓ′′ ) with probability
                     
             k−1           ℓ
                               g̃1 (t − 1, x′′ + ℓ′′ , k ′′ )
             k − 1 ℓ′′
              ′′
             (                                   (
                  x
                  ′′               if ℓ′′
                                          > 0         f˜p (t, x + ℓ′′ , ℓ − ℓ′′ , k − k ′′ , z) if ℓ′′ < ℓ
           · xx                                ·
                      − xz′′                          g̃p (t − 1, x + ℓ′′ , k − k ′′ , z)
                             
                 x′′
                                   otherwise                                                    otherwise
           · 1/f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z)

              for each possible triple (k ′′ , x′′ , ℓ′′ )
 3:      G1 ← Sample G      e1 (t − 1, x′ + ℓ′ , k ′ )
 4:      G2 ← ℓ′ < ℓ ? Sample Fep (t, x + ℓ′ , ℓ − ℓ′ , k − k ′ , z) : Sample G      ep (t − 1, x + ℓ′ , k −
     ′
    k , z)
 5:      if ℓ′ > 0 then
 6:          Choose a uniformly random subset X ′ ⊆ X of size x′ containing x + ℓ + 1
 7:      else
 8:          Choose a uniformly random subset X ′ ⊆ X of size x′ containing x + ℓ + 1
                   such that X ′ ̸⊆ [z]
 9:      end if
10:      Choose a uniformly random subset L′ ⊆ [x + 1, x + ℓ] of size ℓ′
11:      Choose a uniformly random subset C ⊆ [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] of size k ′ containing
    x+ℓ+1
12:      D ← [x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k] \ C
13:      Relabel G1 by applying ϕ([x′ ], X ′ ) to the labels in [x′ ], applying ϕ([x′ +1, x′ +ℓ′ ], L′ )
              to the labels in [x′ + 1, x′ + ℓ′ ], and applying ϕ([x′ + ℓ′ + 1, x′ + ℓ′ + k ′ ], C) to
    the
              labels in [x′ + ℓ′ + 1, x′ + ℓ′ + k ′ ]
14:      Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + ℓ + 1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ], D) to the labels in [x + ℓ +
    1, x + ℓ + k − k ′ ]
15:      if ℓ′ < ℓ then
16:          Relabel G2 by applying ϕ([x + 1, x + ℓ′ ], L′ ) to the labels in [x + 1, x + ℓ′ ] and
    applying
                  ϕ([x + ℓ′ + 1, x + ℓ], [x + 1, . . . , x + ℓ] \ L′ ) to the labels in [x + ℓ′ + 1, x + ℓ]
17:      end if
18:      G ← Glue(G1 , G2 , X ′ ∪ L′ )
19:      return G
20: end procedure




                                                    101
Chapter 3

Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs
in Expected Polynomial Time


3.1     Introduction

   In Chapter 2, we designed an algorithm that generates n-vertex labeled chordal graphs
uniformly at random. This algorithm runs in polynomial time, using at most O(n7 ) arith-
metic operations for the first sample and O(n4 ) arithmetic operations for each subsequent
sample. However, when discussing the performance of an algorithm that is being tested,
the correct output typically does not depend on the labeling of the vertices. If we use a
labeled-graph sampling algorithm to generate random test cases, then asymmetric graphs
will be given too much weight/probability compared to those that happen to have many
automorphisms. This naturally leads to the question of efficiently generating unlabeled
chordal graphs uniformly at random. In this chapter, we present an algorithm that solves
this problem and runs in expected polynomial time.

Theorem 5 There is a randomized algorithm that given n ∈ N, generates a graph uni-
formly at random from the set of all unlabeled chordal graphs on n vertices. This algorithm
                                           102
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                   Chapter 3


uses O(n7 ) arithmetic operations in expectation.


   It is worth mentioning the difference between the running times for labeled vs. unla-
beled chordal graph sampling. The sampling algorithm in Chapter 2 generates a random
n-vertex labeled chordal graph in polynomial time, even in the worst case. However,
obtaining a worst-case polynomial-time algorithm for sampling unlabeled chordal graphs
— or an expected-polynomial-time counting algorithm for such graphs — appears to be
very difficult since these questions remain open even for general graphs. This is relevant
because the class of chordal graphs is known to be GI-complete. While there exist classes
of graphs for which efficient unlabeled sampling algorithms are known (see Chapter 1),
we are not aware of any GI-complete graph class with such an algorithm.
   Our algorithm for sampling unlabeled chordal graphs builds upon an algorithm of
Wormald that generates n-vertex unlabeled graphs uniformly at random in expected
time O(n2 ) [16]. This in turn builds upon a related algorithm by Dixon and Wilf [92]
that solves the same problem but assumes that the exact number of n-vertex unlabeled
graphs has already been computed. In [16], the algorithm of Wormald follows a somewhat
similar structure but removes that assumption. As mentioned above, the question of
computing the exact number of n-vertex unlabeled graphs in expected polynomial time
remains open to this day.


3.1.1    Methods

   The sampling algorithm of Wormald [16] is based on the fact that unlabeled graphs
correspond to orbits of the following group action: the symmetric group Sn acts on the
set of labeled graphs by permuting the vertex labels. This correspondence follows from
the Frobenius-Burnside lemma. Therefore, to sample a random unlabeled graph, it is
enough to sample a random orbit of this group action.

                                           103
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                        Chapter 3


   To make this approach work for chordal graphs, we need two ingredients: (1) an
algorithm for counting and sampling labeled chordal graphs with a given automorphism
π, and (2) a proof that the probability that a random n-vertex labeled chordal graph has
                                                      2
a given automorphism π ∈ Sn is at most 1/2c max{µ ,n} , where µ is the number of moved
points of π (i.e., the non-fixed points) and c is a constant.
   For (1), we design an FPT (fixed-parameter tractable) counting algorithm that is
parameterized by µ, the number of moved points of π. This algorithm uses O(27µ n9 )
arithmetic operations. Using the standard sampling-to-counting reduction of [1], we
also obtain a corresponding sampling algorithm with the same running time. Our main
algorithm (for sampling unlabeled chordal graphs) calls each of these FPT algorithms as
a black box with potentially large values of the parameter µ. Nevertheless, using the
bound from (2), we are able to show that the probability of using a large value of µ is
exponentially small, so the expected running time is not significantly affected.
   To design the counting algorithm for (1), we rewrite each of the recurrences from
the algorithm in Chapter 2, now carrying around information about the automorphism
π and its moved points. The original algorithm is a dynamic-programming algorithm in
which there is a constant number of types of vertices (X, L, etc.) in each graph that we
wish to count. In our updated version, we now keep track of the type of each vertex that
is moved by π.
   To prove the bound for (2), we distinguish between the cases when µ is small and µ is
                                                n
large (µ is either less than or greater than d log n
                                                     , where d is a constant). When µ is small,
we use the fact that almost every chordal graph is a split graph [53], and we strengthen
this by showing that in fact, almost every chordal graph is a balanced split graph. For
the case of balanced split graphs, the argument is easy and is similar to the proof of the
bound for general graphs [93]. When µ is large, the argument is more complicated. We
observe that the vast majority of n-vertex labeled chordal graphs have maximum clique
                                             104
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                         Chapter 3


size close to n/2. Along the way, we also use the fact that for every chordal graph G,
there exists a PEO (perfect elimination ordering) of G such that some maximum clique
appears at the tail end of that PEO.



3.2      Preliminaries

3.2.1     Permutations

   For n ∈ N, let Sn denote the group of all permutations of [n]. For a permutation
π ∈ Sn , we define Mπ := {i ∈ [n] : π(i) ̸= i} to be the set of points moved by π. For
n ∈ N, [n]0 := {0, 2, 3, . . . , n} denotes the set of all possible values of |Mπ | for π ∈ Sn .
We write id ∈ Sn for the identity permutation.
   Suppose π ∈ Sn , C ⊆ [n]. We write π(C) := {π(i) : i ∈ C} to denote the image of C
under π. We say C is invariant under π if π(i) ∈ C for all i ∈ C. For a set C that is
invariant under π, we write π|C to denote the permutation π restricted to the domain C.
For a permutation π ∈ Sn and a labeled graph G such that V (G) ⊆ [n] is invariant under
π, we say π|V (G) is an automorphism of G if for all u, v ∈ V (G), u and v are adjacent
if and only if π(u) and π(v) are adjacent. In other words, this is an isomorphism from
V (G) to itself.


3.2.2     Chordal graphs and evaporation sequences

   Our algorithm for counting the number of labeled chordal graphs with a given auto-
morphism uses the notion of evaporation sequences from Chapter 2. See Section 2.3.1
for the relevant definitions. Also, see Definition 2 for the concept of gluing together two
chordal graphs. The following two lemmas are well-known facts about chordal graphs.
The proof of the first can be found in [90].

                                              105
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                            Chapter 3


Lemma 40 Every chordal graph G contains a simplicial vertex. If G is not a complete
graph, then G contains two non-adjacent simplicial vertices.


Lemma 41 A chordal graph G on n vertices has at most n maximal cliques.


     Proof: Let C be a maximal clique in G, and let vi be the leftmost vertex of C in
a given perfect elimination ordering v1 , . . . , vn of G. We claim that C is equal to the
closed neighborhood to the right of vi , i.e., C = N [vi ] ∩ {vi , . . . , vn }. It is clear that C
is contained in N [vi ] ∩ {vi , . . . , vn } since vi has no other neighbors to its right, so we
indeed have C = N [vi ] ∩ {vi , . . . , vn } by maximality of C. Therefore, there are at most
n maximal cliques.



3.3      Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs

   In [16], Wormald presented an algorithm that generates an n-vertex unlabeled graph
uniformly at random in expected time O(n2 ). In this chapter, we achieve a similar result
for chordal graphs:


Theorem 5 There is a randomized algorithm that given n ∈ N, generates a graph uni-
formly at random from the set of all unlabeled chordal graphs on n vertices. This algorithm
uses O(n7 ) arithmetic operations in expectation.


   The sampling algorithm of Wormald makes use of the fact that unlabeled graphs
correspond to orbits of a particular group action. Since our algorithm will follow a similar
outline, we begin by discussing some of the ideas behind the algorithm of Wormald.
   Suppose we have been given n ∈ N as input, and let Ω be the set of all labeled graphs
with vertex set [n]. The symmetric group Sn acts on Ω in the following way: For each
π ∈ Sn and G ∈ Ω, π · G is the graph that results from permuting the vertex labels of
                                               106
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                   Chapter 3


G according to π. The orbits of Ω under the action of Sn are the isomorphism classes of
labeled graphs, each of which corresponds to an unlabeled graph. Let

                  Γ = {(π, G) ∈ Sn × Ω : π is an automorphism of G}.

Suppose we fix an n-vertex unlabeled graph H, and let the corresponding isomorphism
class of labeled graphs be H. As is shown in [16], the number of pairs (π, G) ∈ Γ such
that G ∈ H is equal to |Sn | = n!. This follows from the Frobenius-Burnside lemma.
Therefore, if we sample a random pair (π, G) ∈ Γ uniformly at random, and then we
forget the labels on the graph G, this amounts to sampling an n-vertex unlabeled graph
uniformly at random.
   In the case of chordal graphs, the same statements hold true. Let Ωchord be the set of
all labeled chordal graphs with vertex set [n]. The symmetric group Sn acts on Ωchord in
the same way as above, by permuting the vertex labels. The set of orbits of this group
action corresponds to the set of unlabeled chordal graphs. Let

              Γchord = {(π, G) ∈ Sn × Ωchord : π is an automorphism of G}.

Let Hc be an unlabeled chordal graph, and let Hc be the corresponding isomorphism class
of labeled graphs. Applying the Frobenius-Burnside lemma to the orbit corresponding
to Hc shows that the number of pairs (π, G) ∈ Γchord such that G ∈ Hc is equal to n!.
   In [16], Wormald describes an algorithm for sampling a random pair (π, G) ∈ Γ in
order to sample a random unlabeled graph. The same outline can be used to sample a
random pair (π, G) ∈ Γchord . However, there are two key points where some difficulty
arises. First of all, in one of the steps of the algorithm that samples from Γ, it is
necessary to count the number of n-vertex labeled graphs with a given automorphism
(and sample from the set of such graphs). This is easy to do for general graphs but
becomes more complicated for chordal graphs (see Sections 3.4 and 3.5). Second, the
                                           107
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                         Chapter 3


algorithm of Wormald uses the fact that the number of labeled graphs with a given
                            n
automorphism π is at most 2( 2 )−µn/2+µ(µ+2)/4 , where µ = |Mπ | is the number of moved
points of π. To transform this into an algorithm for sampling unlabeled chordal graphs,
it is necessary to prove similar bounds on the number of labeled chordal graphs with a
given automorphism. These will be the bounds Bµ in our algorithm.


3.3.1    Algorithm for sampling unlabeled chordal graphs

   Let Count Chordal Lab(n) stand for the counting algorithm in Chapter 2 that
computes the number of n-vertex labeled chordal graphs. In Sections 3.4 and 3.5, we will
prove the following two theorems.

Theorem 6 There is a deterministic algorithm that given n ∈ N and π ∈ Sn , computes
the number of labeled chordal graphs with vertex set [n] for which π is an automorphism.
This algorithm uses O(27µ n9 ) arithmetic operations, where µ = |Mπ |.


Theorem 7 There is a randomized algorithm that given n ∈ N and π ∈ Sn , generates a
graph uniformly at random from the set of all labeled chordal graphs with vertex set [n]
for which π is an automorphism. This algorithm uses O(27µ n9 ) arithmetic operations,
where µ = |Mπ |.

   In our algorithm for sampling unlabeled chordal graphs, Count Chordal Lab(n, π)
stands for the algorithm of Theorem 6 and Sample Chordal Lab(n, π) stands for the
algorithm of Theorem 7.
   Recall that [n]0 = {0, 2, 3, . . . , n}. For µ ∈ [n]0 , let Rµ := {π ∈ Sn : |Mπ | = µ} be the
set of permutations with exactly µ moved points. For π ∈ Sn , let Fix(π) denote the set
of n-vertex labeled chordal graphs G such that π is an automorphism of G. To follow the
same approach as the algorithm of Wormald, for each µ ∈ [n]0 , we need an upper bound
                                             108
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                        Chapter 3


Bµ that satisfies Bµ ≥ |Rµ ||Fix(π)| for all π ∈ Rµ . Let B0 be the number of n-vertex
labeled chordal graphs, which is exactly equal to |R0 ||Fix(id)|. For 2 ≤ µ ≤ 200 nlog n , let
                                              2           2
                                                                  
                       Bµ = B0 (9/10)n + 2n 22n /9 + n · 2n /4+n/2 nµ µ!,                 (3.1)

and for 200 nlog n < µ ≤ n, let

                                                  2
                                   Bµ = n2n+1 2n /4−f (µ) nµ µ!,                          (3.2)

                  µ2     µ
where f (µ) = 900     − 10 . In Section 3.3.2, we will prove that we indeed have Bµ ≥
                                                                    P
|Rµ ||Fix(π)| for all π ∈ Rµ , when n is sufficiently large. Let B = µ∈[n]0 Bµ .
   Our algorithm for sampling a random n-vertex unlabeled chordal graph is given in
Algorithm 2. The general idea is as follows. For µ ∈ [n]0 , let Γµ = {(π, G) ∈ Γchord :
|Mπ | = µ}. We choose µ such that the probability of each value of µ is Bµ /B, which is
approximately equal to Γµ /Γchord . (We do not know how to efficiently compute the exact
value of Γµ /Γchord since we do not know the exact number of unlabeled chordal graphs.)
Since Bµ /B is not exactly equal to Γµ /Γchord , we adjust for this by restarting with a
certain probability in Step 11. We then proceed to select a random pair (π, G) ∈ Γµ , and
we output the graph G without labels.




                                               109
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                     Chapter 3


Algorithm 2 Unlabeled chordal graph sampler
 1: procedure Sample Chordal Unlabeled(n)
 2:    ▷ Setup
 3:    B0 ← Count Chordal Lab(n)
 4:    Let Bµ be given by Equation (3.1) for 2 ≤ µ ≤ 200 nlog n
 5:      Let Bµ be given by Equation (3.2) for 200 nlog n < µ ≤ n
              P
 6:      B ← µ∈[n]0 Bµ
 7:
 8:    ▷ Main algorithm
 9:    Choose µ ∈ [n]0 at random such that µ = i with probability Bi /B for each i ∈ [n]0
10:    Choose π ∈ Rµ uniformly at random
11:    Restart (go back to Step 9) with probability
           1 − |Rµ | · Count Chordal Lab(n, π)/Bµ
12:    G ← Sample Chordal Lab(n, π)
13:    Forget the labels on the vertices of G
14:    return G
15: end procedure



      Step 10 can easily be implemented in O(n) time in the following way. If µ = 0, let
π = id. For µ ≥ 2, we can repeatedly choose a random permutation of [µ] until we obtain
a derangement. The expected number of trials for this is a constant (see [16]).
   In Step 11, to compute |Rµ |, we observe that |R0 | = 1 and |Rµ | = !µ nµ for µ ≥ 2.
                                                                            

Here !µ is the number of derangements of µ. We compute !µ using the formula !m =
m! m         i
  P
     i=0 (−1) /i! for m ∈ N, which can be derived using the inclusion-exclusion principle.




3.3.2      Correctness of Algorithm 2

      See Section 3.5 for the proof of correctness of Count Chordal Lab(n, π) and
Sample Chordal Lab(n, π).
      We need to show that the output graph is chosen uniformly at random. One “itera-
tion” refers to one run of Steps 9 to 11 or 9 to 14. In a given iteration, we say (π, G) was
“chosen” if π was chosen from Rµ and G was chosen by Sample Chordal Lab(n, π).
We claim that for all (π, G) ∈ Γchord , in any given iteration, the probability that (π, G)
                                            110
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                   Chapter 3


is chosen is 1/B. Indeed, this probability is equal to

                           Bµ 1 |Rµ ||Fix(π)|    1      1
                                                       = ,
                           B |Rµ |    Bµ      |Fix(π)|  B

where µ = |Mπ |, since the probability of choosing G in Step 12 is 1/|Fix(π)|. Therefore,
we output all n-vertex unlabeled chordal graphs with equal probability.
   Next, we need to show that Bµ ≥ |Rµ ||Fix(π)| for all π ∈ Rµ to verify that the
probability |Rµ ||Fix(π)|/Bµ in Step 11 is at most 1. When µ = 0 this is an equality, so
suppose µ ≥ 2. Clearly |Rµ | ≤ nµ µ!, so we just need to prove that the number of n-vertex
labeled chordal graphs with automorphism π is at most Bµ /(nµ µ!) for all π ∈ Sn with µ
moved points.
   In the case when Bµ is defined according to Equation (3.2), this follows from Theo-
rem 8. The proof of this theorem can be found in Section 3.6. (The bound in Theorem 8
is in fact true for all values of µ — the reason why we define Bµ differently for smaller
values of µ will become clear when we discuss the running time in Section 3.3.3.)


Theorem 8 Let n ∈ N, π ∈ Sn , and let µ = |Mπ |. The number of labeled chordal graphs
with vertex set [n] for which π is an automorphism is at most

                                              2
                                     n2n+1 2n /4−f (µ) ,

              µ 2   µ
where f (µ) = 900 − 10 .


   For the other case, suppose 2 ≤ µ ≤ 200 nlog n , and suppose π ∈ Sn is a permutation
with µ moved points. We need to show that the number of n-vertex labeled chordal
graphs with automorphism π is at most Bµ /(nµ µ!). We begin by reducing to the case of
split graphs. A split graph is a graph whose vertex set can be partitioned into a clique
and an independent set, with arbitrary edges between the two parts. It is easy to see
that every split graph is chordal. Furthermore, the following result by Bender et al. [53]
                                            111
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                        Chapter 3


shows that a random n-vertex labeled chordal graph is a split graph with probability
1 − o(1).

                                                   √
Proposition 2 (Bender et al. [53]) If α >              3/2, n is sufficiently large, and G is a
random n-vertex labeled chordal graph, then

                              Pr(G is a split graph) > 1 − αn .

                                          9
   Applying this proposition with α = 10    tells us that the number of n-vertex labeled
                                                  9 n
                                                    
chordal graphs that are not split is at most B0 10    . To bound the number of n-vertex
labeled split graphs with automorphism π, we consider two cases: balanced split graphs
and unbalanced split graphs. We say an n-vertex split graph is balanced if |C| ≥ n3 and
|I| ≥ n3 for every split partition (C, I) of G. It is easy to bound the number of unbalanced
split graph as follows.

Lemma 42 The number of labeled split graphs on n vertices that are not balanced is at
            2
most 2n 22n /9 .

     Proof: Suppose (C, I) is a partition of [n] into two parts such that |C| < n3 or
|I| < n3 . The number of labeled split graphs with this particular split partition is at most
            n 2n     2
2|I||C| ≤ 2 3 · 3 = 22n /9 . Therefore, the number of unbalanced labeled split graphs on n
                          2
vertices is at most 2n 22n /9 since there are at most 2n possible partitions.
    The following lemma will be useful for bounding the number of balanced split graphs.

Lemma 43 Let π ∈ Sn , and let G be an n-vertex labeled split graph. If π is an automor-
phism of G, then there exists a split partition (C, I) of G such that C and I are invariant
under π.

     Proof: Let Ĉ be the set of vertices that belong to the clique in every split partition
of G, let Iˆ be the set of vertices that belong to the independent set in every split partition
                                             112
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                          Chapter 3


of G, and let Q̂ = V (G) \ (Ĉ ∪ ˆ
                                 I). By Observation 6 in Chapter 2, every vertex in Q̂ is
adjacent to every vertex in Ĉ and is non-adjacent to every vertex in ˆ
                                                                      I. By Lemma 25, Q̂
is either a clique or an independent set. Suppose π is an automorphism of G. If Q̂ is a
clique, then the split partition (Ĉ ∪ Q̂, ˆ
                                           I) has the desired property. If Q̂ is an independent
set, then the split partition (Ĉ, Iˆ ∪ Q̂) has the desired property.

Lemma 44 Let π ∈ Sn , and suppose |Mπ | ≥ 2. The number of balanced labeled split
graphs G on n vertices such that π is an automorphism of G is at most
                                                     2
                                             n · 2n /4+n/2 .

     Proof: Suppose (C, I) is a partition of [n] into two parts. Let i = |I| and c = |C|.
The number of labeled split graphs with this particular split partition is 2ic . Therefore,
the number of labeled split graphs with automorphism π for which (C, I) has the property
from Lemma 43 is at most 2ic . Let Z(C,I) be the number of such graphs. Whenever two
vertices u, v ∈ I (resp. C) belong to the same cycle in the cycle decomposition of π, u
and v must have the same relationship as each other to each of the vertices in C (resp. I).
Therefore, we in fact have an upper bound of max{2(i−1)c , 2i(c−1) } on Z(C,I) , since π has at
                                                                                         2
least two moved points. If i ≥ n3 and c ≥ n3 , then we have max{2(i−1)c , 2i(c−1) } ≤ 2n /4−n/2 .
   By Lemma 43, every balanced labeled split graph on n vertices with automorphism
π has a split partition (C, I) such that C and I are invariant under π. Furthermore, this
split partition is balanced (i.e., both parts have size at least n3 ). Therefore, the number
of balanced labeled split graphs on n vertices with automorphism π is at most
                                                 2               2
                               X
                                           2n · 2n /4−n/2 ≤ n · 2n /4+n/2
                           ⌈n
                            3
                              ⌉≤i≤⌊ 2n
                                     3
                                       ⌋

since the number of partitions (C, I) with |I| = i is certainly at most 2n .
   Putting together Proposition 2 and Lemmas 42 and 44, we can see that
                                                          
                                n   n 2n2 /9     n2 /4+n/2
                       B0 (9/10) + 2 2       +n·2            nµ µ!
                                                     113
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                     Chapter 3


is an upper bound on |Rµ ||Fix(π)| when n is sufficiently large.
   Let N0 be the cutoff such that this works for n ≥ N0 . To be precise, when implement-
ing this algorithm, we would solve the problem by brute force if n < N0 (by generating
all possible n-vertex chordal graphs and then selecting one at random), and we would
run Algorithm 2 as written if n ≥ N0 .


3.3.3    Running time of Algorithm 2

   The running time of Steps 1-6 is O(n7 ) arithmetic operations since that is the running
time of Count Chordal Lab(n). In this section, we will show that the rest of the
algorithm uses only O(n7 ) arithmetic operations in expectation.
   If we choose µ = 0 in Step 9 of Algorithm 2, then the algorithm is guaranteed to
terminate in that iteration. Thus the expected number of iterations is at most B/B0 .
Let T be the expected running time of Algorithm 2 after completing Step 6 (this is where
we choose µ at random and the loop begins). In Lemma 45, we show that E[T ] is at
most the product of B/B0 and the expected running time of one iteration.
    Let N be the number of iterations of Algorithm 2, and let Tj be the time spent in
iteration j for each j ∈ [N ]. We have T = N
                                          P
                                           j=1 Tj .



Lemma 45 We have E[T ] ≤ BB0 E[T1 ].


    Proof: Clearly E[T ] is finite since the expected number of iterations is finite and the
procedures Count Chordal Lab(n, π) and Sample Chordal Lab(n, π) have worst-
case running time bounds. Therefore, we can solve for E[T ] in the following way.
   The steps that we run in one iteration (Steps 9-14) do not depend on j — they are
always the same, regardless of how many iterations have happened so far. Thus we have
  hP               i
     N
E    j=2 Tj  N > 1   = E[T ], which implies E[T | N > 1] = E[T1 | N > 1] + E[T ].


                                           114
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                       Chapter 3


Therefore, we have

           E[T ] = E[T | N = 1] Pr(N = 1) + E[T | N > 1] Pr(N > 1)
                                                                  
                 = E[T1 | N = 1] Pr(N = 1) + E[T1 | N > 1] + E[T ] · Pr(N > 1)


    =⇒ E[T ](1 − Pr(N > 1)) = E[T1 | N = 1] Pr(N = 1) + E[T1 | N > 1] Pr(N > 1)

                                 = E[T1 ]

                                               E[T1 ]    B
                            =⇒ E[T ] =                 ≤    E[T1 ].
                                             Pr(N = 1)   B0



   For µ ∈ [n]0 , let T (n, µ) be an upper bound on the time it takes to run one it-
eration, assuming we have chosen this particular value of µ in Step 9. By the running
time of Count Chordal Lab(n, π) and Sample Chordal Lab(n, π), we can assume
T (n, µ) = O(27µ n9 ). We have
                                              X Bµ
                                  E[T1 ] =                 T (n, µ).
                                                       B
                                             µ∈[n]0

To prove a bound on E[T1 ], we will start by proving a bound on Bµ /B for all µ ∈ [n]0 .
Since B0 ≤ B, it is sufficient to prove a bound on Bµ /B0 for all µ ∈ [n]0 . The following
lemma gives us a lower bound on B0 .

Lemma 46 For n ≥ 2, the number of n-vertex labeled chordal graphs is at least
                                                   2
                                             2n 2n /4
                                                      .
                                                n2

     Proof: It is enough to just consider n-vertex labeled split graphs with a split partition
(C, I) such that |C| = ⌊ n2 ⌋. Since ⌊ nn ⌋ ≥ 2n /n for n ≥ 2, the number of such graphs is
                                           
                                         2

at least
                                              n2 /4        2
                                                       2n 2n /4
                                  
                                       n      2
                                                     ≥          .
                                      ⌊ n2 ⌋    n         n2
                                                115
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                       Chapter 3


We divide by n in the first expression since each split graph can have up to n distinct
split partitions in which C is of a given size [28].


Lemma 47 Suppose n ≥ 13. If 2 ≤ µ ≤ 200 nlog n , then

                                           Bµ    3
                                              ≤ 16µ .
                                           B0  n
                   (1)   (2)        (3)
     Proof: Let Bµ , Bµ , and Bµ be the three terms that are added together in Equa-
                                                   
                                    (1)  (2)    (3)
tion (3.1), in order, so that Bµ = Bµ + Bµ + Bµ nµ µ!. We have

                                     (1)                  n
                                   Bµ nµ µ!
                                                 
                                                     9
                                            =                  nµ µ!,
                                     B0              10

and we claim that this is at most 1/n16µ . Since µ! ≤ nµ , it is sufficient to show n18µ ≤
(10/9)n , which is true when µ ≤ 200 nlog n .
   For the next term, by Lemma 46 we have
                                    (2)
                                  Bµ nµ µ!         2
                                           ≤ n2 2−n /36 nµ µ!.
                                    B0
                                                                                         n
To see that this is at most 1/n16µ , it is sufficient to show n19/200 ≤ 2n/36 since µ ≤ 200 .
This is indeed true for n ≥ 13.
   For the third term, by Lemma 46 we have
                                     (3)
                                   Bµ nµ µ!
                                            ≤ n3 2−n/2 nµ µ!.
                                     B0

To see that this is at most 1/n16µ , it is sufficient to show n20µ ≤ 2n/2 , which is true when
        n
µ ≤ 40 log n
             . Adding together these three terms, we obtain Bµ /B0 ≤ 3/n16µ .


Lemma 48 For sufficiently large n, if 200 nlog n < µ ≤ n, then

                                           Bµ    1
                                              ≤ 16µ .
                                           B0  n


                                                116
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                       Chapter 3

                                               2
        Proof: Lemma 46 implies B0 ≥ 2n /4 for n ≥ 4, so we have

                                         Bµ
                                            ≤ n2n+1 2−f (µ) nµ µ!,
                                         B0
              µ     µ 2
where f (µ) = 900 − 10 . We claim that this expression is at most 1/n16µ . Since µ! ≤ nµ ,
it is sufficient to show n2n+1 n18µ ≤ 2f (µ) . When n is sufficiently large,1 we have log3 n ≤
            n2
    1
2002 ·1800 2n+1
                . Since µ ≥ 200 nlog n , this implies

                                                         2
                                            n2n+1 ≤ 2µ /1800 .                          (3.3)

When n is sufficiently large,2 we also have n ≥ 18 · 900 · 200 log2 n + 90 · 200 log n. Since
µ ≥ 200 nlog n , this implies

                                                    2
                                          n18µ ≤ 2µ /1800−µ/10 .                        (3.4)

Multiplying Equations (3.3) and (3.4) gives us the desired bound of n2n+1 n18µ ≤ 2f (µ) .


       By Lemmas 47 and 48, the above summation for E[T1 ] is at most T (n, 0) + O(1)
since T (n, µ) is certainly at most O(n16µ ). For an iteration in which we have chosen
µ = 0, when counting and sampling n-vertex labeled chordal graphs with automorphism
π = id, we can simply run the counting and sampling algorithms of Chapter 2, rather
than passing in π = id as an input. Thus the expected running time E[T1 ] of one iteration
is at most O(n7 ) arithmetic operations. Lemmas 47 and 48 also immediately give us a
bound on B/B0 , since we have

                                    B    B0 B2         Bn
                                       =   +   + ... +    = O(1).
                                    B0   B0 B0         B0

Therefore, by Lemma 45, the overall running time is at most O(n7 ) arithmetic operations
in expectation.
   1
       This holds for n ≥ 2.6 · 105 .
   2
       This holds for n ≥ 3.3 · 109 .
                                                   117
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                  Chapter 3


3.4     Counting Labeled Chordal Graphs with a Given

        Automorphism

   In this section, we describe the algorithm for Count Chordal Lab(n, π), which
counts the number of labeled chordal graphs with a given automorphism. This is the
algorithm of Theorem 6. In Section 3.5 we will prove correctness, analyze the running
time, and derive the corresponding sampling algorithm (Theorem 7).


Theorem 6 There is a deterministic algorithm that given n ∈ N and π ∈ Sn , computes
the number of labeled chordal graphs with vertex set [n] for which π is an automorphism.
This algorithm uses O(27µ n9 ) arithmetic operations, where µ = |Mπ |.


   In Chapter 2, we gave a dynamic-programming algorithm for computing the number
n-vertex labeled chordal graphs that uses O(n7 ) arithmetic operations, in the case when
we do not require the graphs to have a particular automorphism. Our algorithm in this
section is closely based on that one, but we add more arguments and more details to
each of the recurrences to keep track of the behavior of the automorphism. As was done
in Chapter 2, we evaluate the recurrences top-down using memoization.


3.4.1    Reducing from counting chordal graphs to counting con-

         nected chordal graphs

   For k ∈ N, let a(k) denote the number of labeled chordal graphs with vertex set
[k], and let c(k) denote the number of connected labeled chordal graphs with vertex set
[k]. Recall that the algorithm of Chapter 2 begins by reducing from counting chordal
graphs to counting connected chordal graphs via the following recurrence. (We omit the
“ω-colorable” requirement since we will not need that here.)

                                           118
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                        Chapter 3


Lemma 49 The number of labeled chordal graphs with vertex set [k] is given by
                               k        
                             X     k−1
                     a(k) =          ′−1
                                           c(k ′ )a(k − k ′ )
                             k′ =1
                                   k
for all k ∈ N.

   Here k ′ stands for the number of vertices in the connected component that contains
the label 1. The remaining connected components have a total of k − k ′ vertices. Since
this recurrence is relatively simple, most of the difficulty in the algorithm of Chapter 2
lies in the recurrences for counting connected chordal graphs. However, when counting
graphs with a given automorphism, the step of reducing to connected graphs is already
quite a bit more involved.
   Suppose we are given n ∈ N and π ∈ Sn as input. From now on, whenever we refer
to n or π, we mean these particular values from the input.
   We will first define a(k, p, M ) and c(k, p, M ), which are variations of a(k) and c(k)
that only count graphs for which π p |V (G) is an automorphism (see Definition 4). Here
π p stands for π to the power p, i.e., the permutation that arises from applying π a total
of p times. The reason for raising π to a power will be apparent in the recurrence for
a(k, p, M ). In the initial, highest-level recursive call, we will have p = 1 and thus π p = π.
   In Chapter 2, when counting the number of possibilities for a subgraph of size k ′
(for example, a connected component), the authors essentially relabel that subgraph to
have vertex set [k ′ ], so that one can count the number of possibilities using, for example,
c(k ′ ). In our algorithm, we want to relabel the vertices of each subgraph in a similar way.
However, this time, we do not relabel the vertices that are moved by π. This ensures
that the automorphism in each later recursive call will still be π, or a permutation closely
related to π.
   As a consequence, the vertex sets of the subgraphs that we wish to count become
slightly more complicated. For example, suppose we wish to count the number of possi-
                                             119
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                        Chapter 3


bilities for a 5-vertex subgraph that originally contains the moved vertices 2, 8, 9 ∈ Mπ .
Since we do not relabel the moved vertices, the resulting vertex set after relabeling is
{1, 2, 3, 8, 9} rather than {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. More formally, suppose we have been given k ∈ N
and M ⊆ Mπ , where |M | ≤ k. Let V be the set of the first k − |M | natural numbers in
N \ Mπ . We define Vk,M := V ∪ M . For example, if k = 5 and M = Mπ = {2, 8, 9}, then
Vk,M = {1, 2, 3, 8, 9}. Intuitively, Vk,m is the label set of size k whose intersection with
Mπ is M and that otherwise contains labels that are as small as possible.
   For π̂ ∈ Sn and M ⊆ [n], recall that M is invariant under π̂ if π̂(i) ∈ M for all i ∈ M .
For M ′ , M ⊆ [n], we write M ′ ⊆π̂ M to indicate that M ′ ⊆ M and M ′ is invariant under
π̂. Intuitively, M ′ is a subset of M that respects the cycles of π̂ by taking all or nothing
of each cycle.


Definition 4 Suppose k, p ∈ [n] and suppose M ⊆πp Mπ , where |M | ≤ k. Let a(k, p, M )
(resp. c(k, p, M )) denote the number of labeled chordal graphs (resp. connected labeled
chordal graphs) with vertex set Vk,M for which π p |V (G) is an automorphism.


   Our algorithm returns a(n, 1, Mπ ). This is precisely the number of labeled chordal
graphs with vertex set [n] and automorphism π since Vn,Mπ = [n].
   Suppose we have been given fixed values of the arguments k, p, M of a(k, p, M ). Let
s be the smallest label in the vertex set Vk,M . For k ′ ∈ [k], let Pk′ be the family of sets
M ′ ⊆πp M such that |M |−k +k ′ ≤ |M ′ | ≤ k ′ and such that the following condition holds:
if s ∈ M , then s ∈ M ′ , and otherwise, |M ′ | ≤ k ′ − 1. This last condition will ensure that
s belongs to the connected component of size k ′ in the recurrence for a(k, p, M ).
   Suppose C ⊆ [n], σ ∈ Sn . For an element i ∈ C, we say the period of i with respect to
(C, σ) is the smallest positive integer j such that σ j (i) ∈ C. Let Q be the family of sets
C ⊆ M such that all elements of C have the same period j ≥ 2 with respect to (C, π p ),
and such that s ∈ C. For a set C ∈ Q, we write pC to denote the period of the elements
                                             120
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                            Chapter 3


of C (with respect to (C, π p )), and we let Cσ := C ∪ σ(C) ∪ · · · ∪ σ pC −1 (C) denote the
union of the sets that C is mapped to by powers of σ, where σ = π p .
    To compute a(k, p, M ), we use the following recurrence. The dot in front of the curly
braces denotes multiplication. Note that we have |M ′ | ≤ k ′ and |M \ M ′ | ≤ k − k ′ by
the definition of Pk′ .


Lemma 50 Let k, p ∈ [n] and suppose M ⊆πp Mπ , where |M | ≤ k. We have
                                                                    
                                                                     k−|M |
                                                                             
                  X                                                 
                                                                       ′   ′
                                                                      k −|M |
                                                                                    if s ∈ M
   a(k, p, M ) =         c(k ′ , p, M ′ )a(k − k ′ , p, M \ M ′ ) ·
                                                                     k−1−|M    |
                                                                                 
                 1≤k′ ≤k                                                           otherwise
                   ′                                                   ′
                                                                      k −1−|M | ′
                     M ∈Pk′
                          X
                     +          c(|C|, p · pC , C)a(k − pC |C|, p, M \ Cπp ).
                          C∈Q


    For some intuition, suppose G is a graph counted by a(k, p, M ), and let C be the
connected component of G that contains s. The first line of the recurrence for a(k, p, M )
covers the case when C is invariant under π p . This case is analogous to Lemma 49. In
the first summation, k ′ stands for |C| and M ′ stands for the set of vertices in C that can
be moved by π p . If s ∈ M , then in addition to the vertices in M ′ , we need to choose
k ′ − |M ′ | additional vertices for C so that |C| = k ′ . For these, we must choose non-moved
vertices, so there are k − |M | possible vertices to choose from. If s ∈
                                                                       / M , then we subtract
1 from each of the numbers in the binomial coefficient since we already know that s is a
non-moved vertex in C.
    The second line covers the case when C is not invariant under π p , which means all
of C is mapped to some other connected component of G by π p . In this case, we have
pC components of size |C| that are all isomorphic to C, and the rest of the graph has
k − pC |C| vertices. We do not need a binomial coefficient in this case because all of the
vertices in C are moved. There are c(|C|, p · pC , C) possibilities for the edges of C since
π p·pC is an automorphism of C. As an example, suppose p = 1. If we apply π p = π to the
                                                   121
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                       Chapter 3


vertices of C a total of pC times, then the image π pC (C) is equal to C, although these
two sets might not match up pointwise. To ensure that the image π pC (C) matches up
with the edges of C, we require that π pC is an automorphism of C. This is why we need
the argument p in a(k, p, M ) and c(k, p, M ).
   Note that for a graph G counted by a(k, p, M ), we have Mπp ∩V (G) ⊆ Mπ ∩V (G) ⊆ M
since V (G) = Vk,M . This means no vertex in V (G) \ M is moved by π p , so we are free to
relabel these vertices in the proof of Lemma 50 without changing the automorphism. In
the initial recursive call a(n, 1, Mπ ), we have p = 1 and M = Mπ , so Mπp ∩ V (G) = M .
Later on in the algorithm, it is possible that some vertices in M are not actually moved
by π p . For example, in the previous paragraph, it could happen that π p·pC is the identity
on C (and then p · pC becomes the new value of p). However, we always have M ⊆ Mπ
by the definition of a(k, p, M ), so if |Mπ | = µ, then |M | ≤ µ. This fact will be useful for
the running time analysis in Section 3.5.3.
   The proof of Lemma 50, along with the proofs of all of the following recurrences, can
be found in Section 3.5.


3.4.2     Recurrences for counting connected chordal graphs

   To compute c(k, p, M ), we will define various counter functions that are analogous to
those in Definition 3 from Chapter 2. The counter functions for our algorithm will be
similar, except we only want to count graphs with a particular automorphism. Therefore,
we will have several more arguments in addition to the usual ones t, x, ℓ, k, z from Def-
inition 3. As above, the argument p will indicate that π p is the current automorphism.
We also introduce the arguments MX , ML , MZ , and MK , each of which is a subset of
Mπ . Roughly, these sets specify which vertices — in X, L := LG (X), Z := [z], and the
rest of the graph, respectively — can be moved by the current permutation (but the sets


                                             122
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                        Chapter 3


X, L, and Z will be modified slightly).
   In Definition 3, the g-functions count graphs with vertex set [x + k], and the f -
functions count graphs with vertex set [x + ℓ + k]. For our algorithm, we will make
some adjustments to these vertex sets to ensure that the vertices moved by the current
permutation still appear in the graph. This is similar to how we defined Vk,M above. To
do so, we define several symbols for these vertex sets and vertex subsets (Vargs , etc.).
Each of these depends on the list of arguments of the function in question, which we
                                                                                  
                                                                  t x       k    z
denote by args. For example, when defining g, we have args =
                                                                  p MX MK MZ
(see Definition 5).
   First, suppose args comes from one of the g-functions in Definition 5. Let VX be
the set of the first x − |MX | natural numbers in N \ Mπ , and let VK be the set of the
first k − |MK | natural numbers in N \ (VX ∪ Mπ ). We define Xargs := VX ∪ MX and
Vargs := Xargs ∪ VK ∪ MK . Also, if z is included in args, then let VZ be the set of the
first z − |MZ | natural numbers in N \ Mπ . In this case, we define Zargs := VZ ∪ MZ .
   For the other case, suppose args comes from one of the f -functions. Let VX be the
set of the first x − |MX | natural numbers in N \ Mπ , let VL be the set of the first ℓ − |ML |
natural numbers in N \ (VX ∪ Mπ ), and let VK be the set of the first k − |MK | natural
numbers in N \ (VX ∪ VL ∪ Mπ ). We define Xargs := VX ∪ MX , Largs = VL ∪ ML , and
Vargs := Xargs ∪Largs ∪VK ∪MK . Also, if z is included in args, then let VZ be the set of the
first z − |MZ | natural numbers in N \ Mπ . In this case, we again define Zargs := VZ ∪ MZ .
   These vertex subsets still have the same sizes as they did in the original algorithm:
the size of Vargs is x + k or x + ℓ + k, |Xargs | = x, |Largs | = ℓ, the rest of the graph has
size k, and |Zargs | = z. Just as we had Z ⊆ X in the original algorithm, we now have
Zargs ⊆ Xargs . This is because we require MZ ⊆ MX in Definition 5, and we also require
z − |MZ | ≤ x − |MX |, which implies VZ ⊆ VX .
   For g-functions, we have Mπp ∩ Vargs ⊆ MX ∪ MK , and for f -functions, we have
                                             123
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                    Chapter 3


Mπp ∩ Vargs ⊆ MX ∪ ML ∪ MK , by the definition of Vargs . We are now ready to define
our new counter functions.


Definition 5 The following functions count various subclasses of chordal graphs. The
arguments t, x, ℓ, k, z are nonnegative integers with the same domains as in Definition 3.
We have p ∈ [n], and the arguments MX , ML , MK , MZ are subsets of Mπ . All other
requirements for their domains are specified below.
                                                                                       
           t x          k        z         t x         k     z            t x     k      z
   1. g                              , g̃                         , g̃p                        ,
          p MX MK MZ                     p MX MK 
                                                           MZ           p MX MK MZ
            t x          k                   t x         k
      g̃1                       , and g̃≥2                    are the same as g(t, x, k, z), g̃(t, x, k, z),
            p MX MK                          p MX MK
      g̃p (t, x, k, z), g̃1 (t, x, k), and g̃≥2 (t, x, k), respectively, except we only count graphs
       for which π p |V (G) is an automorphism, and we make the following changes to the
       vertices of the graph: the vertex set is Vargs rather than [x + k], the exception set is
       Xargs rather than [x], and [z] is replaced by Zargs .

       Domain: MX ⊆πp Mπ , MK ⊆πp Mπ \ MX , MZ ⊆πp MX , |MX | ≤ x, |MK | ≤ k,
       |MZ | ≤ z, and z − |MZ | ≤ x − |MX |.
                                                                                      
          t x          ℓ      k        t    x     ℓ    k           t    x       ℓ      k
   2. f                           , f˜                     , f˜p                              , and
         p  M  X    M   L  M  K       p
                                          M X   M  L M K          p   M  X   M   L   M K

      ˜    t x          ℓ      k     z
      fp                                  are the same as f (t, x, ℓ, k), f˜(t, x, ℓ, k), f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k),
           p MX ML MK MZ
      and f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, z), respectively, except we only count graphs for which π p |V (G) is
       an automorphism, and we make the following changes to the vertices of the graph:
       the vertex set is Vargs rather than [x + ℓ + k], the exception set is Xargs rather than
       [x], the last set to evaporate is Largs rather than [x + 1, x + ℓ], and [z] is replaced
       by Zargs .

       Domain: MX ⊆πp Mπ , ML ⊆πp Mπ \MX , MK ⊆πp Mπ \(MX ∪ML ), MZ ⊆πp MX ,
       |MX | ≤ x, |ML | ≤ ℓ, |MK | ≤ k, |MZ | ≤ z, and z − |MZ | ≤ x − |MX |.

                                                   124
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                      Chapter 3


    For a graph G counted by one of these functions, π p |V (G) is indeed a permutation of
V (G) since MX and MK (and ML if needed) are invariant under π p .
    To compute c(k, p, M ), we consider all possibilities for the evaporation time. In the
following recurrence, g̃1 (with those particular arguments) counts the number of labeled
connected chordal graphs with vertex set Vargs = Vk,M and automorphism π p |V (G) that
evaporate at time exactly t with empty exception set.

Lemma 51 Let k, p ∈ [n] and suppose M ⊆πp Mπ , where |M | ≤ k. We have
                                             k                  
                                             X           t 0 k
                             c(k, p, M ) =         g̃1               .
                                                         p ∅ M
                                             t=1

    To compute g̃1 , we consider all possibilities for the size ℓ of Largs . The set M in the
inner sum stands for the set of vertices in Largs that can be moved by π p . Note that
we have |M | ≤ ℓ and |MK \ M | ≤ k − ℓ by the definition of Iℓ . For g̃1 and all of the
following functions, we recommend reading the analogous recurrences in Chapter 2 for
further insight into what is happening with the arguments t, x, ℓ, k, z in each recursive
call.

Lemma 52 For g̃1 , we have
                       X  k X                             
            t x     k               k − |MK |     t x ℓ  k−ℓ
      g̃1                =                     f                 ,
            p MX MK                  ℓ − |M |    p MX M MK \ M
                           ℓ=1 M ∈I     ℓ


where Iℓ = {M ⊆πp MK : |MK | − k + ℓ ≤ |M | ≤ ℓ}.

    To compute f , we consider all possibilities for the set of labels that appear in con-
nected components of G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ) that evaporate at time exactly t − 1. These
components correspond to the recursive call to f˜. The set M stands for the set of vertices
in components that evaporate at time exactly t − 1 that can be moved by π p . Note that
we have |M | ≤ k ′ and |MK \ M | ≤ k − k ′ by the definition of Ik′ . Since |ML | ≤ ℓ, we
also have x − |MX | ≤ x + ℓ − |MX ∪ ML |, which is required by the domain of g.
                                              125
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                      Chapter 3


Lemma 53 For f , we have
                       
      t x     ℓ      k
  f                       =
      p MX ML MK
    k    X k − |MK |  t x          ′
                                                              ′
                                                                    
  X                               ℓ k      t − 2  x + ℓ   k − k   x
                         f˜              g                            ,
             k ′ − |M |     p MX ML M        p   MX ∪ ML MK \ M MX
  k′ =1 M ∈Ik′


where Ik′ = {M ⊆πp MK : |MK | − k + k ′ ≤ |M | ≤ k ′ }.


   To compute g, we consider all possibilities for the set of labels that appear in connected
components of G \ Xargs that evaporate at time exactly t. These components correspond
to the recursive call to g̃. The set M stands for the set of vertices in components that
evaporate at time exactly t that can be moved by π p .


Lemma 54 For g, we have
                            
             t x   k      z
        g                       =
             p MX MK MZ
           k   X k − |MK |  t x     k′              k − k′
                                                              
        X                                 z    t−1 x          z
                              g̃             g                    ,
          ′
                  k ′ − |M |      p MX M MZ     p  MX MK \ M MZ
        k =0 M ∈Ik′


where Ik′ = {M ⊆πp MK : |MK | − k + k ′ ≤ |M | ≤ k ′ }.


   For the next recurrence, we will need a few more definitions. Suppose we have been
given fixed values of the arguments of g̃. Let s be the smallest label in Vargs \ Xargs . For
k ′ ∈ [k], let Pk′ be the family of sets M ⊆πp MK such that |MK | − k + k ′ ≤ |M | ≤ k ′
and such that the following condition holds: if s ∈ MK , then s ∈ M , and otherwise,
|M | ≤ k ′ − 1. For x′ ∈ [x], let Ix′ = {M ′ ⊆πp MX : |M ′ | ≤ x′ }.
   Let Q be the family of pairs (C, M ′ ), where C ⊆ MK and M ′ ⊆ MX , such that all
elements of C have the same period pC ≥ 2 with respect to (C, π p ), such that s ∈ C,
and such that M ′ is invariant under π p·pC . For a set C from such a pair, we let Cσ :=
C ∪ σ(C) ∪ · · · ∪ σ pC −1 (C), where σ = π p .
                                                  126
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                                  Chapter 3


   To compute g̃, we consider all possibilities for the label set of the connected component
C of G \ Xargs that contains s. In the definition of g̃, the components of G \ Xargs are
similar enough (since they all evaporate at time t) that they can potentially be mapped
to one another by π p . Thus we consider two cases: either C is invariant under π p , or C is
mapped to some other component of G \ Xargs by π p . We add together the summations
from these two cases, in a similar way to the recurrence for a(k, p, M ). In the recurrence
for g̃, k ′ stands for |C|, and x′ stands for |N (C)|. The set M stands for the set of vertices
in C that can be moved by π p , and M ′ stands for the set of vertices in N (C) that can
be moved by π p .


Lemma 55 For g̃, we have

                                                        t x′ k ′                    k − k′
                                                                                        
         t x   k  z                   X                                       t x          z
      g̃                         =                g̃1                      g̃
         p MX MK MZ                                     p M′ M                p MX MK \ M MZ
                                     1≤k′ ≤k
                                     1≤x′ ≤x
                                     M ∈Pk′                      
                                     M ′ ∈Ix′
                                                                  k−|MK |
                                                                          
                                                                 
                                                                    k′ −|M |
                                                                                    if s ∈ MK
                                                             ·
                                                                  k−1−|M  K|
                                                                             
                                                                 
                                                                    ′
                                                                   k −1−|M |
                                                                                    otherwise
                                                                 
                                                                  x−|MX |                         if M ′ ̸⊆ MZ
                                                                 
                                                                          
                                                                    x′ −|M ′ |
                                                             ·
                                                                  x−|MX|         z−|MZ |
                                                                                             
                                                                 
                                                                    ′   ′
                                                                    x −|M |
                                                                            −     x′ −|M ′ |
                                                                                                   otherwise


                                                           x′ |C|
                                                                                   
                                 X                     t             t x k − pC |C| z
                           +                g̃1                   g̃
                                                    p · pC M ′ C     p MX MK \ Cπp MZ
                                1≤x′ ≤x
                               (C,M ′ )∈Q
                                                                 
                                                                  x−|MX |                         if M ′ ̸⊆ MZ
                                                                 
                                                                          
                                                                    x′ −|M ′ |
                                                             ·
                                                                  x−|M X|        z−|MZ |
                                                                                             
                                                                 
                                                                    ′    ′
                                                                    x −|M |
                                                                             −    x′ −|M ′ |
                                                                                                   otherwise.

   To compute f˜, we consider three cases: either no component of G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs )
sees all of Xargs ∪ Largs , exactly one component sees all of Xargs ∪ Largs , or at least two

                                                            127
    Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                      Chapter 3


    components see all of Xargs ∪ Largs . The recursive calls to g̃1 and g̃≥2 correspond to the
    component/components that see all of Xargs ∪ Largs . In the second and third cases, the
    set M stands for the set of vertices that can be moved by π p in components that see all
    of Xargs ∪ Largs .

    Lemma 56 For f˜, we have
                                                  
         t   x      ℓ    k              t  x    ℓ  k
     f˜                         = f˜p
         p MX ML MK                    p MX ML MK
                                                  k′ ˜ t x     k − k′
              
         X k − |MK |                                              
                                 t−1       x+ℓ              ℓ
     +                      g̃1                      f
           ′
                k ′ − |M |         p      MX ∪ ML M p p MX ML MK \ M
         1≤k ≤k
         M ∈Ik′
     X k − |MK |                           k′                  k − k′
                                                                       
                                 t−1  x+ℓ           t−1  x+ℓ            x
+                          g̃≥2                  g̃                         ,
                k ′ − |M |        p  MX ∪ ML M p     p  MX ∪ ML MK \ M MX
    1≤k′ ≤k
    M ∈Ik′

    where Ik′ = {M ⊆πp MK : |MK | − k + k ′ ≤ |M | ≤ k ′ }.

        For the next recurrence, suppose we have been given fixed values of the arguments of
    g̃≥2 . Let s be the smallest label in Vargs \ Xargs , and let Pk′ be defined as it was in the
    recurrence for g̃. Let Q be the family of sets C ⊆ M such that all elements of C have
    the same period pC ≥ 2 with respect to (C, π p ), and such that s ∈ C. For a set C ∈ Q,
    we let Cσ := C ∪ σ(C) ∪ · · · ∪ σ pC −1 (C), where σ = π p .
        To compute g̃≥2 , we consider all possibilities for the label set of the connected compo-
    nent C of G \ Xargs that contains s. This is somewhat similar to the recurrence for g̃, but
    this time we do not need to keep track of the neighborhood of C, since every component
    of G \ Xargs sees all of Xargs .

    Lemma 57 For g̃≥2 , we have
                         
              t x       k
       g̃≥2                  =
              p MX MK
                                                                            !
                            k′               k − k′                  k − k′
                                                         
         X           t x               t x                     t x
               g̃1               g̃1                  + g̃≥2
            ′
                     p MX M            p MX MK \ M             p MX MK \ M
              1≤k ≤k
              M ∈Pk′

                                                  128
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                         Chapter 3

                                                          
                                                           k−|MK |
                                                                   
                                                          
                                                             k′ −|M |
                                                                          if s ∈ MK
                                                      ·
                                                           k−1−|M K|
                                                                     
                                                          
                                                             ′
                                                             k −1−|M |
                                                                          otherwise

                                                                       !
    X              t    x |C|        t x k − pC |C|           t x k − pC |C|
+         g̃1                  g̃1                   + g̃≥2                   .
                p · pC MX C          p MX MK \ C π           p MX MK \ C π
    C∈Q

    To compute g̃p , all we need to do is make a slight adjustment to the recurrence for g̃.

Lemma 58 The recurrence for g̃p is exactly the same as the recurrence for g̃ from
Lemma 55, except for the two sums over x′ : In both summations, rather than summing
over x′ such that 1 ≤ x′ ≤ x, we sum over x′ such that 1 ≤ x′ ≤ x − 1.

    To compute f˜p , we first observe that when z = x, requiring G \ Zargs to be connected
is the same as requiring G \ Xargs to be connected.
                                                    
                 ˜    t x   ℓ  k     ˜    t x  ℓ  k  x
Lemma 59 We have fp                = fp                 .
                      p MX ML MK         p MX ML MK MX

    For the next f˜p recurrence, we need one last round of definitions. Suppose we have
been given fixed values of the arguments of f˜p , including z and MZ . Let s be the smallest
label in Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ). For k ′ ∈ [k], let Pk′ be the family of sets M ⊆πp MK such
that |MK |−k+k ′ ≤ |M | ≤ k ′ and such that the following condition holds: if s ∈ MK , then
s ∈ M , and otherwise, |M | ≤ k ′ − 1. For 0 ≤ x′ ≤ x, let Ix′ = {M ′ ⊆πp MX : |M ′ | ≤ x′ }.
Also, for 0 ≤ ℓ′ ≤ ℓ, let Jℓ′ = {M ′ ⊆πp ML : |M ′ | ≤ ℓ′ }.
    Let Q be the family of triples (C, MX′ , ML′ ), where C ⊆ MK , MX′ ⊆ MX , and ML′ ⊆
ML , such that all elements of C have the same period pC ≥ 2 with respect to (C, π p ),
such that s ∈ C, and such that MX′ ∪ ML′ is invariant under π p·pC . For a set C from such
a triple, we let Cσ := C ∪ σ(C) ∪ · · · ∪ σ pC −1 (C), where σ = π p .
    To compute f˜p with the argument z, we consider all possibilities for the label set of the
component C of G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ) that contains s. There are two possible cases: either
                                              129
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                Chapter 3


C is invariant under π p , or C is mapped to some other component of G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs )
by π p . We add together the summations from these two cases, both of which are now
rather complicated. However, the general idea is similar to the earlier recurrences. In
the following recurrence, k ′ stands for |C|, x′ stands for |N (C) ∩ Xargs |, and ℓ′ stands for
|N (C) ∩ Largs |. For the moved vertices, M stands for the set of vertices in C that can be
moved by π p , MX′ stands for the set of vertices in N (C) ∩ Xargs that can be moved by
π p , and ML′ stands for the set of vertices in N (C) ∩ Largs that can be moved by π p .


Lemma 60 For f˜p with the argument z, we have

                                                                                   x′ + ℓ ′ k′
                                                                                            
          t x   ℓ  k  z                               X         X             t−1
      f˜p                                     =                          g̃1
          p MX ML MK MZ                                                        p  MX′ ∪ ML′ M
                                                    1≤k′ ≤k   M ∈Pk′
                                                    0≤x′ ≤x    ′ ∈I
                                                              MX    x′
                                                    0≤ℓ′ ≤ℓ    ′ ∈J
                                                              ML    ℓ′
                                                     ′  ′
                                                  0<x +ℓ <x+ℓ

                                                 
                                                     k−|MK |
                                                           
                            
                              ℓ − |ML |
                                                 
                                                     ′
                                                     k −|M |
                                                                       if s ∈ MK
                           · ′                 ·
                              ℓ − |ML′ |                     K|
                                                  k−1−|M
                                                                 
                                                 
                                                      ′
                                                     k −1−|M |
                                                                       otherwise
                             
                              x−|M    X|
                                                                 if ℓ′ > 0 or MX′ ̸⊆ MZ
                             
                                          
                                x′ −|MX′ |
                           ·
                              x−|M    X|        z−|MZ |
                                                        
                                       ′ | − x′ −|M ′ |          otherwise
                             
                                x′ −|MX                 X
                                                                                     !
                                                   ′                ′             ′
                                     t       x +  ℓ         ℓ −   ℓ        k −  k   z
                              f˜
                             
                                                                                          if ℓ′ < ℓ
                             
                             
                              p p MX ∪ ML′ ML \ ML′ MK \ M MZ
                             
                             
                           ·                                                      !
                                                                         ′
                             
                                   t  −  1      x   +  ℓ        k  −  k      z
                             g̃p                                                         otherwise
                             
                             
                                       p       MX ∪ ML′ MK \ M MZ
                             


                             X t − 1       x′ + ℓ′
                                                                    
                                                     |C|    ℓ − |ML |
                    +           g̃1                      · ′
                              ′
                                    p · pC MX′ ∪ ML′ C      ℓ − |ML′ |
                           0≤x ≤x
                            0≤ℓ′ ≤ℓ
                         0<x′ +ℓ′ <x+ℓ
                        (C,MX′ ,M ′ )∈Q
                                  L




                                                      130
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                        Chapter 3

                            
                             x−|MX |                if ℓ′ > 0 or MX′ ̸⊆ MZ
                            
                                     
                                     ′ |
                               x′ −|MX
                        ·
                           x−|M   X|       z−|MZ |
                                                  
                          
                               ′   ′
                             x −|MX |
                                        −    ′   ′
                                           x −|MX |
                                                         otherwise
                                                                             !
                                               ′            ′
                                 t      x + ℓ         ℓ − ℓ     k − p C |C| z
                           f˜
                          
                                                                                  if ℓ′ < ℓ
                          
                          
                           p p MX ∪ ML′ ML \ ML′ MK \ C π MZ
                          
                          
                        ·                                                !
                          
                                t−1        x+ℓ         k − pC |C| z
                          g̃p                                                    otherwise.
                          
                          
                                                    ′
                                   p      MX ∪ ML MK \ C π MZ
                          


    The base cases for all of these counter functions are the same as in Chapter 2 since
they only depend on the arguments t, x, ℓ, k, z.



3.5       Proofs of Theorems 6 and 7

    In this section, we prove correctness of the recurrences from Section 3.4 and complete
the proofs of Theorems 6 and 7.


3.5.1      Automorphism properties

    First of all, we show that automorphisms preserve evaporation time.


Lemma 61 Suppose G is a labeled chordal graph that evaporates at time t with exception
set X, where X ⊆ V (G) is a clique, and let L1 , . . . , Lt be the evaporation sequence. If π̂
is an automorphism of G such that X is invariant under π̂, then Li is invariant under π̂
for all i ∈ [t].


     Proof: We proceed by induction on i. Let L
                                              e1 be the set of all simplicial vertices in

G. If the neighborhood of a vertex v ∈ V (G) is a clique, then the neighborhood of π̂(v)
must also be a clique, so L
                          e1 is invariant under π̂. Since X is also invariant under π̂, this
                  e1 \ X is invariant under π̂.
implies that L1 = L

                                             131
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                          Chapter 3


   For the induction step, suppose L1 , . . . , Li are all invariant under π̂ for some i ∈ [t−1].
This means π̂|V (G)\(L1 ∪···∪Li ) is an automorphism of G \ (L1 ∪ · · · ∪ Li ). By the same
                                      ei+1 of simplicial vertices of G \ (L1 ∪ · · · ∪ Li ) is
argument as in the base case, the set L
                                                                       ei+1 \ X is invariant
invariant under π̂|V (G)\(L1 ∪···∪Li ) and also under π̂. Hence Li+1 = L
under π̂ as well.
   Next, we prove two lemmas that relate the automorphisms of a graph G to the
automorphisms of its induced subgraphs.


Lemma 62 Let G be a labeled chordal graph with an automorphism π̂ and induced sub-
graphs G1 and G2 such that V (G1 ) ∪ V (G2 ) = V (G). If X := V (G1 ) ∩ V (G2 ) and
A := V (G1 ) \ V (G2 ) are both invariant under π̂, then π̂|V (G1 ) is an automorphism of G1
and π̂|V (G2 ) is an automorphism of G2 .


    Proof: We know π̂|V (G1 ) is a bijection from V (G1 ) to V (G1 ) since X and A are
invariant under π̂. Moreover, this map is in fact an automorphism of G1 since π̂ is an
automorphism of G and G1 is an induced subgraph. Similarly, π̂|V (G2 ) is a bijection from
V (G2 ) to V (G2 ) since X and V (G2 ) \ V (G1 ) are invariant under π̂, and this map is in
fact an automorphism G2 .


Lemma 63 Let G be a labeled chordal graph with induced subgraphs G1 and G2 such
that V (G1 ) ∪ V (G2 ) = V (G) and such that there are no edges from V (G1 ) \ V (G2 ) to
V (G2 ) \ V (G1 ). If π̂ is a permutation of V (G) such that π̂|V (G1 ) is an automorphism of
G1 and π̂|V (G2 ) is an automorphism of G2 , then π̂ is an automorphism of G.


    Proof: Let u, v ∈ V (G). If u and v both belong to V (G1 ), then u and v are adjacent
in G1 if and only if π̂(u) and π̂(v) are adjacent in G1 since π̂|V (G1 ) is an automorphism of
G1 . Since G1 is an induced subgraph of G, this means u and v are adjacent in G if and
only if π̂(u) and π̂(v) are adjacent in G. The same statement also holds if u, v ∈ V (G2 ).
                                              132
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                         Chapter 3


The only remaining case is when one vertex is in V (G1 ) \ V (G2 ) and the other is in
V (G2 ) \ V (G1 ). In this case, u and v are not adjacent in G, and neither are π̂(u) and
π̂(v) since V (G1 ) ∩ V (G2 ) is invariant under π̂.


3.5.2     Proofs of recurrences

   Recall that we are given n and π as input. The proofs of all of these recurrences build
upon the proofs of the analogous recurrences in Chapter 2. For this reason, we highly
recommend reading the proof of correctness of the counting algorithm in Chapter 2 before
reading this section in detail. In the proof of almost every recurrence here, we will cite
the analogous lemma from Chapter 2 to prove various properties such as the evaporation
time of each subgraph.

Remark 2 One important piece of the original proofs in Chapter 2 is that for each
recurrence, the authors describe two injective functions. For example, in the proof of the
recurrence for g(t, x, k, z), there is an injective function that maps each graph G counted
by g(t, x, k, z) to a tuple (G1 , G2 , A), as well as an injective function that maps each tuple
(G1 , G2 , A) to such a graph G. In this chapter, we only prove injectivity in detail in the
proof of the recurrence for g̃, since this statement for each of the other recurrences is
either similar to g̃ or simpler than g̃. This can be found in Lemmas 64 and 65, after the
recurrence for g̃.

   We use uppercase letters to denote the set of graphs counted by each of the counter
functions. For example, the set of graphs counted by a(k, p, M ) is denoted by A(k, p, M ),
                                                                                     
                                 t x     k     z                       t x      k     z
the set of graphs counted by g                     is denoted by G                         ,
                                p MX MK MZ                             p MX MK MZ
and so on. We also use similar notation for the original counter functions: G(t, x, k, z)
is the set of graphs counted by g(t, x, k, z), G(t,
                                               e x, k, z) is the set of graphs counted by

g̃(t, x, k, z), and so on. We proceed in the order in which our counter functions were
                                              133
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                            Chapter 3


defined, so that similar functions and proofs appear consecutively. (This is somewhat
different from the ordering of the lemma numbers.)


Lemma 50 Let k, p ∈ [n] and suppose M ⊆πp Mπ , where |M | ≤ k. We have
                                                                    
                                                                     k−|M |
                                                                             
                  X
                                                                    
                                                                       ′   ′
                                                                      k −|M |
                                                                                    if s ∈ M
   a(k, p, M ) =         c(k ′ , p, M ′ )a(k − k ′ , p, M \ M ′ ) ·
                                                                       k−1−|M |
                                                                                 
                 1≤k′ ≤k                                                           otherwise
                                                                       ′        ′
                                                                    
                   ′ M ∈Pk′                                           k −1−|M |
                         X
                     +         c(|C|, p · pC , C)a(k − pC |C|, p, M \ Cπp ).
                         C∈Q


     Proof: Let Ginv be the set of graphs G ∈ A(k, p, M ) such that C is invariant under π p ,
where C is the connected component of G that contains s, and let Gmove = A(k, p, M ) \
Ginv . To prove this recurrence, we will first describe a map from Ginv to the set of tuples
(G1 , G2 , k ′ , M ′ , Ĉ) with the properties given below, and then we will describe a map from
Gmove to the set of tuples (G1 , G′ , C) given below. This will imply that a(k, p, M ) is at
most the summation above. Next, to show that a(k, p, M ) is at least the summation
above, we will describe a map from the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , M ′ , Ĉ) to Ginv , as well as
a map from the set of tuples (G1 , G′ , C) to Gmove . Strictly speaking, to prove these two
bounds (≤ and ≥), it remains to show that all of these maps are injective. See Remark 2.
    To see that a(k, p, M ) is at most the summation above, suppose G ∈ A(k, p, M ). Let
C be the set of vertices in the connected component of G that contains s. There are
two possible cases: either C is invariant under π p , or all of C is mapped to some other
component of G by π p . If we are in the first case, then let G1 = G[C] and G2 = G \ C.
Let k ′ = |C|, M ′ = C ∩ M , Ĉ = C \ M ′ , and D = V (G2 ). Note that |Ĉ| = k ′ − |M ′ |.
Since π p maps C to itself, this means π p |V (G1 ) is an automorphism of G1 , π p |V (G2 ) is
an automorphism of G2 , and we have M ′ ⊆πp M . Clearly |M ′ | ≤ k ′ . We also have
k ′ − |M ′ | ≤ k − |M | since the number of vertices that are fixed points of π p in G1 is at
most the number of fixed points in G. If s ∈ M , then we know s ∈ M ′ by the definition
                                                  134
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                              Chapter 3


                      / M , then we have |M ′ | ≤ k ′ − 1 since s ∈ C \ M ′ . Hence M ′ ∈ Pk′ .
of C. Otherwise, if s ∈
    Now relabel G1 by applying ϕ(Ĉ, Vk′ ,M ′ \ M ′ ) to the labels in Ĉ, and relabel G2 by
applying ϕ(D \ M, Vk−k′ ,M \M ′ \ M ) to the labels in D \ M . We have Mπp ∩ Vk,M ⊆ M by
the definition of Vk,M , so by only relabeling vertices outside of M , we know that we have
not relabeled any vertices that are moved by π p . Thus π p |V (G1 ) and π p |V (G2 ) continue
to be automorphisms of G1 and G2 . Clearly D \ M = D \ (M \ M ′ ). We also have
Vk−k′ ,M \M ′ \ M = Vk−k′ ,M \M ′ \ (M \ M ′ ) since Vk−k′ ,M \M ′ \ (M \ M ′ ) is disjoint from
Mπ and is therefore disjoint from M . Hence G1 now has the vertex set Vk′ ,M ′ and G2
has the vertex set Vk−k′ ,M \M ′ . Since G1 is connected, we have G1 ∈ C(k ′ , p, M ′ ) and
G2 ∈ A(k − k ′ , p, M \ M ′ ).
    If we are in the second case, where C is mapped to some other component of G by
π p , then we have C ∈ Q since every connected component of G is mapped to a connected
component of G by π p . Let C1 = C, and let Ci = π p (Ci−1 ) for 2 ≤ i ≤ pC . Let Gi = G[Ci ]
for i ∈ [pC ]. The graphs G2 , . . . , GpC are all isomorphic to G1 since π p , . . . , π p(pC −1) are
automorphisms of G. (This ensures that the map that takes G to (G1 , G′ , C) is injective,
where G′ is as defined below.)
    For the remainder of the graph, let D = V (G) \ (C1 ∪ · · · ∪ CpC ), and let G′ = G[D].
Leave G1 as is, and relabel G′ by applying ϕ(D \ M, Vk̂,M̂ \ M ) to the labels in D \ M ,
where k̂ = k − pC |C| and M̂ = M \ Cπp . We know π p·pC |V (G1 ) is an automorphism of G1
since π p·pC |V (G) is an automorphism of G that maps C to itself. We also know π p |V (G′ )
is an automorphism of G′ , so G1 ∈ C(|C|, p · pC , C) and G′ ∈ A(k − pC |C|, p, M \ Cπp ).
Hence a(k, p, M ) is at most the summation above.
    We now show that a(k, p, M ) is bounded below by this summation. For the first case,
suppose we are given 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, a set M ′ ∈ Pk′ , a graph G1 ∈ C(k ′ , p, M ′ ), a graph
G2 ∈ A(k − k ′ , p, M \ M ′ ), and a subset Ĉ ⊆ Vk,M \ M of size k ′ − |M ′ | that contains s
     / M . Let C = M ′ ∪ Ĉ, and let D = Vk,M \ C. We construct a graph G as follows:
if s ∈
                                                 135
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                           Chapter 3


Relabel G1 by applying ϕ(Vk′ ,M ′ \ M ′ , Ĉ) to the labels in Vk′ ,M ′ \ M ′ , and relabel G2 by
applying ϕ(Vk−k′ ,M \M ′ \ M, D \ M ) to the labels in Vk−k′ ,M \M ′ \ M . Now let G be the
union of G1 and G2 (by taking the union of the vertex sets and the edge sets). Since
π p |V (G1 ) is an automorphism of G1 and π p |V (G2 ) is an automorphism of G2 , this means
π p |V (G) is an automorphism of G, so we have G ∈ A(k, p, M ).
   For the second case, suppose we are given a set C ∈ Q, a graph G1 ∈ C(|C|, p · pC , C),
and a graph G′ ∈ A(k − pC |C|, p, M \ Cπp ). Let G2 , . . . , GpC all be equal to G1 initially.
Leave G1 as is, and relabel Gi by applying π p(i−1) to its label set for all 2 ≤ i ≤ pC . Let
D = Vk,M \ Cπp . Relabel G′ by applying ϕ(Vk̂,M̂ \ M, D \ M ) to the labels in Vk̂,M̂ \ M ,
where k̂ = k − pC |C| and M̂ = M \ Cπp . Finally, let G be the union of G1 , . . . , GpC , and
G′ . The label sets of G1 , . . . , GpC are all pairwise disjoint since C ∈ Q. If we apply π p to
all of the labels in Gi for some 1 ≤ i < pC , then the resulting graph is Gi+1 . Furthermore,
if we apply π p to the labels in GpC , then the resulting graph is the same as the graph we
obtain if we apply π p·pC to the labels in G1 . Since π p·pC |V (G1 ) is an automorphism of G1 ,
this graph is in fact equal to G1 . This means π p |V (Ĝ) is an automorphism of Ĝ, where Ĝ
is the union of G1 , . . . , GpC . Since we also know π p |V (G′ ) is an automorphism of G′ , this
implies that π p |V (G) is an automorphism of G. Therefore, G ∈ A(k, p, M ), so a(k, p, M )
is at least the summation above.


Lemma 51 Let k, p ∈ [n] and suppose M ⊆πp Mπ , where |M | ≤ k. We have
                                               k                  
                                               X           t 0 k
                               c(k, p, M ) =         g̃1               .
                                                           p ∅ M
                                               t=1


     Proof: This is similar to the proof of the recurrence for c(n) in Chapter 2 (see the
beginning of Section 2.5.3). The only difference is that in this recurrence, both c(k, p, M )
and g̃1 are counting graphs G with vertex set Vargs = Vk,M for which π p |V (G) is an
automorphism.

                                                136
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                         Chapter 3


Lemma 54 For g, we have
                          
           t x   k      z
      g                       =
           p MX MK MZ
         k   X k − |MK |  t x     k′              k − k′
                                                            
      X                                 z    t−1 x          z
                            g̃             g                    ,
        ′
                k ′ − |M |      p MX M MZ     p  MX MK \ M MZ
      k =0 M ∈Ik′


where Ik′ = {M ⊆πp MK : |MK | − k + k ′ ≤ |M | ≤ k ′ }.
                                          
                        t x       k     z
    Proof: Let G = G                        . To prove this recurrence, we will first
                        p MX MK MZ
describe a map from G to the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , M, Â) with the properties given
below, which will imply that g is at most the summation above. Next, to show that g is at
least the summation above, we will describe a map from the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , M, Â)
to G. Strictly speaking, to prove these two bounds (≤ and ≥), it remains to show that
both of these maps are injective. See Remark 2.
                                                                                  
                                                                  t x      k    z
   To see that g is at most the summation above, suppose G ∈ G                       .
                                                                  p MX MK MZ
Let args, args1 , and args2 be the arguments of g on the left, g̃, and g on the right,
respectively. Let A be the set of vertices in components C of G \ Xargs such that C
evaporates at time exactly t in G with exception set Xargs , and let B be the set of
vertices of all other components of G \ Xargs . Let G1 = G[Xargs ∪ A], G2 = G[Xargs ∪ B],
k ′ = |A|, M = A ∩ MK , and Â = A \ M . Note that |Â| = k ′ − |M |. We know Xargs is
invariant under π p since MX is invariant under π p . If π p were to map some vertex in A,
which belongs to a component C of G \ Xargs , to a vertex in B, then π p would also map
all of C to B, including the vertices of C that evaporate at time t. By Lemma 61, this
is impossible, so A is invariant under π p , and so is M . Since G has the automorphism
π p |V (G) , by Lemma 62 this means G1 has the automorphism π p |V (G1 ) and G2 has the
automorphism π p |V (G2 ) . Clearly |M | ≤ k ′ , and we also have k ′ − |M | ≤ k − |MK | since
the number of vertices that are fixed points of π p in A is at most the number of fixed
points in G \ Xargs . Hence M ∈ Ik′ .
                                              137
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                              Chapter 3


       Now relabel G1 by applying ϕ(Xargs \MX , Xargs1 \MX ) to the labels in Xargs \MX and
applying ϕ(Â, Vargs1 \ (Xargs1 ∪ M )) to the labels in Â. Relabel G2 by applying ϕ(Xargs \
MX , Xargs2 \MX ) to the labels in Xargs \MX and applying ϕ(B\MK , Vargs2 \(Xargs2 ∪MK ))
to the labels in B \ MK . We have only relabeled vertices that are not moved by π p , so
G1 and G2 still have the automorphisms π p |V (G1 ) and π p |V (G2 ) . By the proof of Lemma 3
                           G(t, x, k ′ , z) and G2 ∈ G(t − 1, x, k − k ′ , z).3 Therefore, we
in Chapter 2, we have G1 ∈ e
                         ′                                             ′
                                                                              
               t  x    k   z                      t − 1   x      k − k         z
have G1 ∈ Ge                     and G2 ∈ G                                       , so g is at
              p MX M MZ                             p    MX MK \ M MZ
most the summation above.
   We now show that g is bounded below by this summation. Suppose we are given
                                                             ′
                                                                  
       ′                                          t    x   k     z
0 ≤ k ≤ k, a set M ∈ Ik′ , a graph G1 ∈ G     e                      , a graph G2 ∈
                                                 p MX M MZ
              k − k′
                         
   t−1 x                z
G                           , and a subset Â ⊆ Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ MK ) of size k ′ − |M |.
     p   MX MK \ M MZ
Let A = M ∪ Â, and let B = Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ A). We construct a graph G as fol-
lows: Relabel G1 by applying ϕ(Xargs1 \ MX , Xargs \ MX ) to the labels in Xargs1 \ MX
and applying ϕ(Vargs1 \ (Xargs1 ∪ M ), Â) to the labels in G1 \ (Xargs1 ∪ M ). Relabel
G2 by applying ϕ(Xargs2 \ MX , Xargs \ MX ) to the labels in Xargs2 \ MX and applying
ϕ(Vargs2 \ (Xargs2 ∪ MK ), B \ MK ) to the labels in G2 \ (Xargs2 ∪ MK ). Since Xargs is now
a clique in both G1 and G2 , we can glue G1 and G2 together at Xargs to obtain a chordal
graph G. By Lemma 63, π p |V (G) is an automorphism of G. By the proof of Lemma 3 in
                                                                                
                                     4                           t x       k   z
Chapter 2, we have G ∈ G(t, x, k, z). Therefore, we have G ∈ G                      ,
                                                                 p MX MK MZ
so g is at least the summation above.
       In the proof of the recurrence for g̃, we use the following relabeling procedures. The
intuition behind these is the same as in our previous lemmas: we relabel the subgraphs
   3
     Technically, this is not quite true since graphs in e    G(t, x, k ′ , z) and G(t − 1, x, k − k ′ , z) have vertex
          ′                     ′
set [x + k ] and [x + k − k ], respectively. However, suppose we relabel G1 by applying ϕ(Zargs1 , [z]) to
the labels in Zargs1 , applying ϕ(Xargs1 \ Zargs1 , [x] \ [z]) to the labels in Xargs1 \ Zargs1 , and applying
ϕ(Vargs1 \ Xargs1 , [x + k ′ ] \ [x]) to the labels in Vargs1 \ Xargs1 . After relabeling G1 in this way, we have
       e x, k ′ , z). Also, if we relabel G2 in a similar way, then we have G2 ∈ G(t − 1, x, k − k ′ , z).
G1 ∈ G(t,
   4
     See Footnote 3.

                                                         138
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                      Chapter 3


in a similar way to Chapter 2, but we do not relabel the moved vertices.

    Procedure A: Relabel G1 by applying ϕ(X̂ ′ , Xargs1 \ M ′ ) to the labels in X̂ ′ and ap-
plying ϕ(Ĉ, Vargs1 \ (Xargs1 ∪ M )) to the labels in Ĉ. Relabel G2 by applying ϕ(Xargs \
MX , Xargs2 \MX ) to the labels in Xargs \MX and applying ϕ(D\MK , Vargs2 \(Xargs2 ∪MK ))
to the labels in D \ MK .

    Procedure B: Relabel G1 by applying ϕ(X̂ ′ , Xargs3 \ M ′ ) to the labels in X̂ ′ , and leave
the labels in C as they are. Relabel G′ by applying ϕ(Xargs \ MX , Xargs4 \ MX ) to the
labels in Xargs \ MX and applying ϕ(D \ MK , Vargs4 \ (Xargs4 ∪ MK )) to the labels in
D \ MK .

    Procedure A′ : In this procedure, we apply the inverse of all of the functions from
Procedure A. For example, when relabeling G1 , we apply ϕ(Xargs1 \ M ′ , X̂ ′ ) to the labels
in Xargs1 \ M ′ .

    Procedure B ′ : For all i ∈ [pC ], relabel Gi by applying ϕ(Xargs3 \ M ′ , X̂ ′ ) to the labels
in Xargs3 \ M ′ . Also, for all 2 ≤ i ≤ pC , relabel Gi by applying π p(i−1) to the labels in
M ′ and applying π p(i−1) to the labels in C. For G′ , we apply the inverse of both of the
functions that were applied to G′ in Procedure B.

Lemma 55 For g̃, we have

                                    t x′ k ′           k − k′
                                                           
         t x    k    z     X                     t x          z
    g̃                   =    g̃1             g̃
         p MX MK MZ         ′
                                   p M′ M        p MX MK \ M MZ
                                   1≤k ≤k
                                   1≤x′ ≤x
                                   M ∈Pk′            
                                   M ′ ∈Ix′
                                                      k−|M K|
                                                              
                                                     
                                                        ′
                                                        k −|M |
                                                                        if s ∈ MK
                                                 ·
                                                      k−1−|M  K|
                                                                 
                                                     
                                                       k′ −1−|M |
                                                                        otherwise
                                                     
                                                      x−|MX |                         if M ′ ̸⊆ MZ
                                                     
                                                              
                                                        x′ −|M ′ |
                                                 ·
                                                      x−|M X|        z−|MZ |
                                                                                 
                                                     
                                                        ′    ′
                                                        x −|M |
                                                                 −    x′ −|M ′ |
                                                                                       otherwise

                                               139
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                           Chapter 3




                                                            x′ |C|
                                                                                    
                                    X                   t             t x k − pC |C| z
                              +                g̃1                 g̃
                                                     p · pC M ′ C     p MX MK \ Cπp MZ
                                   1≤x′ ≤x
                                  (C,M ′ )∈Q
                                                              
                                                               x−|MX |                        if M ′ ̸⊆ MZ
                                                              
                                                                       
                                                                 x′ −|M ′ |
                                                          ·
                                                               x−|M X|       z−|MZ |
                                                                                         
                                                              
                                                                 ′    ′
                                                                 x −|M |
                                                                          −   x′ −|M ′ |
                                                                                               otherwise.
                                                                             
                                                      t x            k      z
      Proof: Let Ginv be the set of graphs G ∈ G  e                                 such that C is
                                                      p MX MK MZ
invariant under π p , where C is the connected component of G \ Xargs that contains
                                          
                          t x      k     z
s, and let Gmove = G  e                       \ Ginv . To prove this recurrence, we will
                         p MX MK MZ
first describe a map from Ginv to the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , x′ , M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ ) with the
properties given below, and then we will describe a map from Gmove to the set of tuples
(G1 , G′ , x′ , C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ) given below. This will imply that g̃ is at most the summation
above. Next, to show that g̃ is at least the summation above, we will describe a map
from the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , x′ , M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ ) to Ginv , as well as a map from the set
of tuples (G1 , G′ , x′ , C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ) to Gmove . See Lemmas 64 and 65 for the proofs that all
of these maps are injective.
    Let args be the arguments of g̃ (on the left side), and let args1 , args2 , args3 , and
args4 be the arguments of g̃1 , g̃, g̃1 (the lower one), and g̃ (the lower one), in the order
that they appear on the right. To see that g̃ is at most the summation above, suppose
                          
         t  x      k     z
G∈G  e                       . Let C be the set of vertices in the component of G \ Xargs
        p MX MK MZ
that contains s, let X ′ = N (C), and let M ′ = X ′ ∩ MX . There are two possible cases:
either C is invariant under π p , or all of C is mapped to some other component of G\Xargs
by π p . If we are in the first case, then let D be the set of vertices of all other components
of G\Xargs . Let G1 = G[X ′ ∪C], G2 = G[Xargs ∪D], k ′ = |C|, x′ = |N (C)|, M = C ∩MK ,
Ĉ = C \ M , and X̂ ′ = X ′ \ M ′ . Note that |Ĉ| = k ′ − |M | and |X̂ ′ | = x′ − |M ′ |. We
know X̂ ′ ̸⊆ Zargs if M ′ ⊆ MZ since the definition of g̃ tells us that X ′ ̸⊆ Zargs . Since
                                                         140
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                            Chapter 3


C is invariant under π p , this means N (C) is also invariant under π p . Therefore, by
Lemma 62, π p |V (G1 ) is an automorphism of G1 and π p |V (G2 ) is an automorphism of G2 .
Since |M ′ | ≤ x′ , we have M ′ ∈ Ix′ . Clearly |M | ≤ k ′ , and we also have k ′ −|M | ≤ k−|MK |
since the number of vertices that are fixed points of π p in C is at most the number of fixed
points in G \ Xargs . If s ∈ MK , then we know s ∈ M by the definition of C. Otherwise,
     / MK , then we have |M | ≤ k ′ − 1 since s ∈ C \ M . Hence M ∈ Pk′ . Now relabel
if s ∈
G1 and G2 using Procedure A so that they have the desired vertex sets. By the proof of
Lemma 4 in Chapter 2, we have G1 ∈ G    e1 (t, x′ , k ′ ) and G2 ∈ e
                                                                   G(t, x, k − k ′ , z).5 Therefore,
                         ′    ′                                      ′
                                                                          
                    t  x    k                     t       x    k − k     z
we have G1 ∈ G e1                 and G2 ∈ G e                                .
                    p M′ M                        p MX MK \ M MZ
   If we are in the second case, where C is mapped to some other component of G\Xargs
by π p , then we claim that (C, M ′ ) ∈ Q. We know every component of G \ Xargs is
mapped to a component of G \ Xargs by π p , so all vertices in C have the same period
pC ≥ 2 with respect to (C, π p ). We have N (π p·pC (C)) = π p·pC (N (C)) since π p·pC |V (G) is an
automorphism of G, and we know π p·pC (C) = C, so π p·pC (M ′ ) = M ′ . Hence (C, M ′ ) ∈ Q.
      Let x′ = |N (C)| and let X̂ ′ = X ′ \ M ′ . Note that |X̂ ′ | = x′ − |M ′ |. We also know
X̂ ′ ̸⊆ Zargs if M ′ ⊆ MZ since X ′ ̸⊆ Zargs . Let C1 = C and let X1′ = X ′ . For 2 ≤ i ≤ pC ,
let Ci = π p (Ci−1 ) and let Xi′ = π p (Xi−1
                                         ′
                                             ). Let Gi = G[Xi′ ∪ Ci ] for i ∈ [pC ]. For the
remainder of the graph, let D = Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ C1 ∪ · · · ∪ CpC ), and let G′ = G[Xargs ∪ D].
Now relabel G1 and G′ using Procedure B.
      Let Ĝ = G[X̌ ∪ Č], where X̌ = X1′ ∪ · · · ∪ Xp′ C and Č = C1 ∪ · · · ∪ CpC . By Lemma 62,
since X̌ and Č are both invariant under π p , we know π p |V (Ĝ) is an automorphism of Ĝ
and π p |V (G′ ) is an automorphism of G′ . Also, by applying Lemma 62 to Ĝ, we can see
that π p·pC |V (G1 ) is an automorphism of G1 since π p·pC |V (Ĝ) is an automorphism of Ĝ that
maps C to itself and maps N (C) to itself. By the proof of Lemma 4 in Chapter 2, we
  5
      See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.



                                                141
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                         Chapter 3

          e1 (t, x′ , |C|) and G′ ∈ e
have G1 ∈ G                         G(t, x, k − pC |C|, z).6 Indeed, even though G′ is defined
slightly differently from G2 , we can similarly show that G′ has the desired properties
                                                                                 ′
                                                                                     
                                                                           t    x  |C|
including the correct evaporation time. Therefore, we have G1 ∈ G   e1
                                                                      p · pC M ′ C
and G′ ∈ G e t x k − pC |C|     π
                                    z
                                        , so g̃ is at most the summation above.
               p MX MK \ C         MZ
    We now show that g̃ is bounded below by this summation. For the first case, suppose
we are given 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, 1 ≤ x′ ≤ x, a set M ∈ Pk′ , a set M ′ ∈ Ix′ , a graph
          t x′ k ′                                      k − k′
                                                                 
                                             t x                 z
G1 ∈ G1
      e                , a graph G2 ∈ G  e                            , a subset Ĉ ⊆ Vargs \
          p M′ M                            p MX MK \ M MZ
(Xargs ∪ MK ) of size k ′ − |M | that contains s if s ∈
                                                      / MK , and a subset X̂ ′ ⊆ Xargs \ MX
of size x′ − |M ′ | such that M ′ ∪ X̂ ′ ̸⊆ Zargs . Let C = M ∪ Ĉ, D = Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ C), and
X ′ = M ′ ∪ X̂ ′ . We construct a graph G as follows: Relabel G1 and G2 using Procedure
A′ , and then glue G1 and G2 together at X ′ to obtain G. By Lemma 63, π p |V (G) is an
automorphism of G. By the proof of Lemma 4 in Chapter 2, we have G ∈ G(t,         e x, k, z).7
                                                
Therefore, we have G ∈ G  e t x         k     z
                                                   .
                             p MX MK MZ
     For the second case, suppose we are given 1 ≤ x′ ≤ x, a pair (C, M ′ ) ∈ Q, a graph
                      ′
                                                                           
                t   x   |C|                        t   x     k − p C |C|  z
G1 ∈ G  e1                   , a graph G′ ∈ G  e                               , and a subset
             p · pC M ′ C                          p MX MK \ C π MZ
X̂ ′ ⊆ Xargs \ MX of size x′ − |M ′ | such that M ′ ∪ X̂ ′ ̸⊆ Zargs . Let X ′ = M ′ ∪ X̂ ′ , and
let D = Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ Cπp ). We construct a graph G as follows: Let G2 , . . . , GpC all
be equal to G1 initially. Next, relabel G1 , . . . , GpC and G′ using Procedure B ′ . For all
i ∈ [pC ], glue the graph Gi to G′ at π p(i−1) (X ′ ), and let G be the resulting graph. We
know X ′ ̸⊆ Zargs , which also implies π p(i−1) (X ′ ) ̸⊆ Zargs for all i ∈ [pC ] since MZ is
invariant under π p .
      An alternative way to construct the same graph G would be to do the following: Let
X̌ be a clique with vertex set X ′ ∪ π p (X ′ ) ∪ · · · ∪ π p(pC −1) (X ′ ). Let Ĝ be the graph
obtained by gluing Gi to X̌ at the clique π p(i−1) (X ′ ) for all i ∈ [pC ]. To obtain G, glue
  6
      See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.
  7
      See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.

                                              142
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                   Chapter 3


Ĝ and G′ together at X̌. We claim that π p |V (Ĝ) is an automorphim of Ĝ. We know
π p (V (Ĝ)) = V (Ĝ) since π p·pC (C) = C and π p·pC (X ′ ) = X ′ . Let u, v ∈ V (Ĝ). If u, v ∈ X̌,
then π p (u), π p (v) ∈ X̌, so u and v are adjacent, and so are π p (u) and π p (v). If u ∈ π pi (C)
and v ∈ π pj (C) for some i ̸≡ j (mod pC ), then π p (u) ∈ π p(i+1) (C) and π p (v) ∈ π p(j+1) (C),
so u and v are not adjacent, and neither are π p (u) and π p (v). If u, v ∈ V (Gi ) for some
1 ≤ i < pC , then u, v ∈ V (Gi+1 ), so u and v are adjacent if and only if π p (u) and π p (v)
are adjacent by the way Gi+1 was constructed. If u, v ∈ V (GpC ), then u, v ∈ V (G1 ). This
means u and v are adjacent if and only if π p (u) and π p (v) are adjacent since π p·pC |V (G1 )
is an automorphism of G1 . Lastly, if u ∈ π pi (C) for some i and v ∈ X̌ \ π pi (X ′ ) (or vice
versa), then u and v are not adjacent, and neither are π p (u) and π p (v) since π p·pC |V (G1 )
is an automorphism of G1 . Hence π p |V (Ĝ) is an automorphim of Ĝ. By Lemma 63, this
implies that π p |V (G) is an automorphism of G. By an argument similar to Lemma 4 in
                                                                                 
                                       8                           t x      k   z
Chapter 2, we have G ∈ G(t, x, k, z). Therefore, we have G ∈ G
                             e                                 e                    ,
                                                                  p MX MK MZ
so g̃ is at least the summation above.
   In the following two lemmas, let Ginv and Gmove be as defined in Lemma 55, and let
                          
         t x       k     z
args =                       be fixed values of the arguments of g̃.
         p MX MK MZ

Lemma 64 Let ψ1 be the map from Ginv to the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , x′ , M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ )
with certain properties from the first case of the “≤” direction of the proof of Lemma 55,
and let ψ2 be the map from Gmove to the set of tuples (G1 , G′ , x′ , C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ) with certain
properties from the second case. The maps ψ1 and ψ2 are injective.


        Proof: To see that ψ1 is injective, suppose G and G⋆ are distinct graphs in Ginv .
We want to show ψ1 (G) ̸= ψ1 (G⋆ ). Suppose that starting from G, we obtain ψ1 (G) =
(G1 , G2 , k ′ , x′ , M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ ), along with the sets C, D, and X ′ as described in Lemma 55.
Suppose that starting from G⋆ , we obtain ψ1 (G⋆ ) = (G⋆1 , G⋆2 , k ′⋆ , x′⋆ , M ⋆ , M ′⋆ , Ĉ ⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ),
   8
       See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.

                                                   143
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                                Chapter 3


along with the sets C ⋆ , D⋆ , and X ′⋆ . If (k ′ , x′ , M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ ) ̸= (k ′⋆ , x′⋆ , M ⋆ , M ′⋆ , Ĉ ⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ),
then we are done, so suppose (k ′ , x′ , M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ ) = (k ′⋆ , x′⋆ , M ⋆ , M ′⋆ , Ĉ ⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ). This
means C = C ⋆ since C = M ∪ Ĉ and C ⋆ = M ⋆ ∪ Ĉ ⋆ , which implies D = D⋆ . Similarly,
we also have X ′ = X ′⋆ .
    Since G ̸= G⋆ , we either have G[X ′ ∪C] ̸= G⋆ [X ′ ∪C] or G[Xargs ∪D] ̸= G⋆ [Xargs ∪D].
If G[X ′ ∪ C] ̸= G⋆ [X ′ ∪ C], then after relabeling, G[X ′ ∪ C] still differs from G⋆ [X ′ ∪ C]
since we use the same sets M = M ⋆ and M ′ = M ′⋆ in both of these relabeling procedures.
Thus in this case, we have G1 ̸= G⋆1 . Otherwise, if G[Xargs ∪ D] ̸= G⋆ [Xargs ∪ D], then
after relabeling, G[Xargs ∪ D] still differs from G⋆ [Xargs ∪ D] since we use the same sets
MX and MK when relabeling, so we have G2 ̸= G⋆2 . Therefore, ψ1 is injective.
    To see that ψ2 is injective, suppose G and G⋆ are distinct graphs in Gmove . We
want to show ψ2 (G) ̸= ψ2 (G⋆ ). Suppose that starting from G, we obtain ψ2 (G) =
(G1 , G′ , x′ , C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ), along with the sets C1 , . . . , CpC , D, X1′ , . . . , Xp′ C and the graphs
G2 , . . . , GpC as described in Lemma 55, where C1 = C. Also, suppose that starting
from G⋆ , we obtain ψ2 (G⋆ ) = (G⋆1 , G′⋆ , x′⋆ , C ⋆ , M ′⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ), along with the sets C1⋆ , . . . , Cp⋆C ,
D⋆ , X1′⋆ , . . . , Xp′⋆C , and the graphs G⋆2 , . . . , G⋆pC , where C1⋆ = C ⋆ . If (x′ , C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ) ̸=
(x′⋆ , C ⋆ , M ′⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ), then we are done, so suppose (x′ , C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ) = (x′⋆ , C ⋆ , M ′⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ). We
have Ci = Ci⋆ for all i ∈ [pC ] since C = C ⋆ , using the fact that Ci = π p (Ci−1 ) and
Ci⋆ = π p (Ci−1
            ⋆
                ). This implies D = D⋆ . Similarly, we also have Xi′ = Xi′⋆ for all i ∈ [pC ]
since X1′ = X1′⋆ .
    Since G ̸= G⋆ , we either have G[Xi′ ∪ Ci ] ̸= G⋆ [Xi′ ∪ Ci ] for some i ∈ [pC ] or G[Xargs ∪
D] ̸= G⋆ [Xargs ∪ D]. First, suppose we have G[Xi′ ∪ Ci ] ̸= G⋆ [Xi′ ∪ Ci ] for some i ∈ [pC ].
For all 2 ≤ i ≤ pC , π p(i−1) is an isomorphism from G1 to Gi , since π p , . . . , π p(pC −1) are
automorphisms of G. Similarly, for all 2 ≤ i ≤ pC , π p(i−1) is an isomorphism from G⋆1
to G⋆i . Therefore, we have G[X1′ ∪ C1 ] ̸= G⋆ [X1′ ∪ C1 ]. After relabeling, G[X1′ ∪ C1 ]
still differs from G⋆ [X1′ ∪ C1 ] since we use the same set M ′ = M ′⋆ in both of these
                                                          144
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                                       Chapter 3


relabeling procedures. Thus in this case, we have G1 ̸= G⋆1 . Otherwise, if G[Xargs ∪ D] ̸=
G⋆ [Xargs ∪ D], then after relabeling, G[Xargs ∪ D] still differs from G⋆ [Xargs ∪ D] since
we use the same sets MX and MK when relabeling, so we have G2 ̸= G⋆2 . Therefore, ψ2
is injective.


Lemma 65 Let ψ1′ be the map from the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , x′ , M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ ) with
certain properties to Ginv from the first case of the “≥” direction of the proof of Lemma 55,
and let ψ2′ be the map from the set of tuples (G1 , G′ , x′ , C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ) with certain properties
to Gmove from the second case. The maps ψ1′ and ψ2′ are injective.


     Proof: To see that ψ1′ is injective, suppose

              (G1 , G2 , k ′ , x′ , M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ ) and (G⋆1 , G⋆2 , k ′⋆ , x′⋆ , M ⋆ , M ′⋆ , Ĉ ⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ )

are distinct tuples in the domain of ψ1′ that map to G and G⋆ , respectively. If k ′ ̸= k ′⋆ ,
then either M ̸= M ⋆ or Ĉ ̸= Ĉ ⋆ since k ′ = |M | + |Ĉ| and k ′⋆ = |M ⋆ | + |Ĉ ⋆ |. Similarly,
if x′ ̸= x′⋆ , then X̂ ′ ̸= X̂ ′⋆ or M ′ ̸= M ′⋆ . Therefore, we know (G1 , G2 , M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ ) ̸=
(G⋆1 , G⋆2 , M ⋆ , M ′⋆ , Ĉ ⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ). Let X ′ = M ′ ∪ X̂ ′ and X ′⋆ = M ′⋆ ∪ X̂ ′⋆ .
    First, suppose (M, Ĉ) ̸= (M ⋆ , Ĉ ⋆ ), which means M ∪ Ĉ ̸= M ⋆ ∪ Ĉ ⋆ . After we relabel
G1 , the vertex set of G1 \ X ′ is M ∪ Ĉ, which contains s. Similarly, after we relabel G⋆1 ,
the vertex set of G⋆1 \ X ′⋆ is M ⋆ ∪ Ĉ ⋆ , which also contains s. Therefore, the component
of G \ Xargs that contains s has a different label set from the component of G⋆ \ Xargs
that contains s, so G ̸= G⋆ .
    Next, suppose (M ′ , X̂ ′ ) ̸= (M ′⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ), which means X ′ ̸= X ′⋆ . The neighborhood of
the component of G\Xargs that contains s is X ′ , and the neighborhood of the component
of G⋆ \ Xargs that contains s is X ′⋆ . Hence G ̸= G⋆ .
    Lastly, suppose (G1 , G2 ) ̸= (G⋆1 , G⋆2 ) and (M, M ′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ ) = (M ⋆ , M ′⋆ , Ĉ ⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ), since
this is the only remaining possibility. If G1 ̸= G⋆1 , then either the component of G \ Xargs
                                                            145
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                           Chapter 3


that contains s will differ from the component of G⋆ \ Xargs that contains s, or the
edges from those components to Xargs will differ. Similarly, if G2 ̸= G⋆2 , then either the
remaining components of G \ Xargs will differ from those of G⋆ \ Xargs , or the edges from
those components to Xargs will differ. Hence G ̸= G⋆ , so ψ1′ is injective.
    To see that ψ2′ is injective, let (G1 , G′ , x′ , C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ) and (G⋆1 , G′⋆ , x′⋆ , C ⋆ , M ′⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ) be
distinct tuples in the domain of ψ2′ that map to G and G⋆ , respectively. By a similar argu-
ment to the first paragraph above, we know (G1 , G′ , C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ) ̸= (G⋆1 , G′⋆ , C ⋆ , M ′⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ).
As before, let X ′ = M ′ ∪ X̂ ′ and X ′⋆ = M ′⋆ ∪ X̂ ′⋆ .
    If C ̸= C ⋆ , then a similar argument to the second paragraph shows that G ̸= G⋆ .
If (M ′ , X̂ ′ ) ̸= (M ′⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ), then a similar argument to the third paragraph shows that
G ̸= G⋆ . Lastly, if (G1 , G′ ) ̸= (G⋆1 , G′⋆ ) and (C, M ′ , X̂ ′ ) ̸= (C ⋆ , M ′⋆ , X̂ ′⋆ ), then a similar
argument to the fourth paragraph shows that G ̸= G⋆ . Hence ψ2′ is injective.


Lemma 58 The recurrence for g̃p is exactly the same as the recurrence for g̃ from
Lemma 55, except for the two sums over x′ : In both summations, rather than summing
over x′ such that 1 ≤ x′ ≤ x, we sum over x′ such that 1 ≤ x′ ≤ x − 1.


     Proof: The argument for g̃p is similar to the proof for g̃, except we do not allow
x′ = x since no component of G \ Xargs sees all of Xargs .


Lemma 52 For g̃1 , we have
                                      k X                          
                     t x   k            X    k − |MK |     t x ℓ  k−ℓ
           g̃1                        =                 f                 ,
                     p MX MK                  ℓ − |M |    p MX M MK \ M
                                       ℓ=1 M ∈Iℓ

where Iℓ = {M ⊆πp MK : |MK | − k + ℓ ≤ |M | ≤ ℓ}.
                                   
                       t    x    k
    Proof: Let G = G
                   e1                 . To prove this recurrence, we will first describe
                       p MX MK
a map from G to the set of tuples (G, ℓ, M, L̂) with the properties given below, which
will imply that g̃1 is at most the summation above. Next, to show that g̃1 is at least
                                                       146
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                   Chapter 3


the summation above, we will describe a map from the set of tuples (G, ℓ, M, L̂) to G.
Strictly speaking, to prove these two bounds (≤ and ≥), it remains to show that both of
these maps are injective. See Remark 2.
   Let args be the arguments of g̃1 . To see that g̃1 is at most the summation above,
                            
                  t  x    k
suppose G ∈ Ge1               . Let C = Vargs \ Xargs , L = LG (Xargs ), A = C \ L,
                  p MX MK
ℓ = |L|, M = L ∩ MK , and L̂ = L \ M . Note that |L̂| = ℓ − |M |. We know π p |V (G) is
an automorphism of G. By Lemma 61, L is invariant under π p , so M ⊆πp MK . Clearly
|M ′ | ≤ ℓ, and we also have ℓ − |M | ≤ k − |MK | since the number of vertices that
are fixed points of π p in L is at most the number of fixed points in G \ Xargs . Hence
M ∈ Iℓ . Now relabel G to have the desired vertex set, in a similar way to Lemma 54.
By the proof of Lemma 1 in Chapter 2, we have G ∈ F (t, x, ℓ, k − ℓ).9 Therefore,
                              
        t x        ℓ   k−ℓ
G∈F                              , so g̃1 is at most the summation above.
        p MX M MK \ M
    We now show that g̃1 is bounded below by this summation. Suppose we are given
                                                                       
                                                     t x     ℓ    k−ℓ
1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k, a set M ∈ Iℓ , a graph G ∈ F                                   , and a subset
                                                     p MX M MK \ M
L̂ ⊆ Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ MK ) of size ℓ − |M |. Relabel G to have the desired vertex set (in
a similar way to Lemma 54). Clearly π p |V (G) is an automorphism of G. By the proof of
                                                                                   
                                                   10                    t x      k
Lemma 1 in Chapter 2, we have G ∈ G1 (t, x, k). Therefore, G ∈ G1
                                        e                            e                ,
                                                                        p MX MK
so g̃1 is at least the summation above.


Lemma 57 For g̃≥2 , we have
                         
              t x       k
       g̃≥2                  =
              p MX MK
                                                                            !
                            k′               k − k′                  k − k′
                                                         
         X           t x               t x                     t x
               g̃1               g̃1                  + g̃≥2
            ′
                     p MX M            p MX MK \ M             p MX MK \ M
        1≤k ≤k
        M ∈Pk′


  9
      See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.
 10
      See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.


                                           147
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                          Chapter 3

                                                          
                                                           k−|MK |
                                                                   
                                                          
                                                             k′ −|M |
                                                                          if s ∈ MK
                                                      ·
                                                           k−1−|M K|
                                                                     
                                                          
                                                             ′
                                                             k −1−|M |
                                                                          otherwise

                                                                       !
    X              t    x |C|        t x k − pC |C|           t x k − pC |C|
+         g̃1                  g̃1                   + g̃≥2                   .
                p · pC MX C          p MX MK \ C π           p MX MK \ C π
    C∈Q
                                                                     
                                                          t x       k
    Proof: Let Ginv be the set of graphs G ∈ G≥2    e                    such that C is invariant
                                                          p MX MK
under π p , where C is the connected component of G \ Xargs that contains s, and let
                            
               t x        k
Gmove = G≥2
         e                     \ Ginv . To prove this recurrence, we will first describe a map
               p MX MK
from Ginv to the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , M, Ĉ) with the properties given below, and then
we will describe a map from Gmove to the set of tuples (G1 , G′ , C) given below. This will
imply that g̃≥2 is at most the summation above. Next, to show that g̃≥2 is at least the
summation above, we will describe a map from the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , M, Ĉ) to Ginv ,
as well as a map from the set of tuples (G1 , G′ , C) to Gmove . Strictly speaking, to prove
these two bounds (≤ and ≥), it remains to show that all of these maps are injective. See
Remark 2.
   Let args be the arguments of g̃≥2 . To see that g̃≥2 is at most the summation above,
                               
                     t  x    k
suppose G ∈ G  e≥2                . Let C be the set of vertices in the component of
                    p MX MK
G \ Xargs that contains s. There are two possible cases: either C is invariant under π p ,
or all of C is mapped to some other component of G \ Xargs by π p . If we are in the
first case, then let D be the set of vertices of all other components of G \ Xargs . Let
G1 = G[Xargs ∪ C], G2 = G[Xargs ∪ D], k ′ = |C|, M = C ∩ MK , and Ĉ = C \ M . Note
that |Ĉ| = k ′ − |M |. We know Xargs is invariant under π p , so by Lemma 62, π p |V (G1 ) is an
automorphism of G1 and π p |V (G2 ) is an automorphism of G2 . We also have M ∈ Pk′ by an
argument similar to the proof for g̃. Now relabel G1 and G2 in a similar way to Lemma 55.
                                                   e1 (t, x, k − k ′ ) if G \ Xargs has
By the proof of Lemma 6 in Chapter 2, we have G2 ∈ G
                                                   e≥2 (t, x, k − k ′ ) otherwise. In
exactly two connected components, and we have G2 ∈ G
                                              148
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                         Chapter 3

                                                                               k′
                                                                                 
                                      ′ 11                               t x
either case, we have G1 ∈ G1 (t, x, k ). Therefore, we have G1 ∈ G1
                             e                                      e               and
                                                                         p MX M
                            k − k′                           k − k′
                                                                   
either G2 ∈ G e1 t x                           e≥2 t x
                                       or G2 ∈ G                       .
                  p MX MK \ M                       p MX MK \ M
    If we are in the second case, where C is mapped to some other component of G\Xargs
by π p , then we know C ∈ Q by an argument similar to the proof for g̃. Let C1 = C, and
let Ci = π p (Ci−1 ) for 2 ≤ i ≤ pC . Let Gi = G[Xargs ∪Ci ] for i ∈ [pC ]. For the remainder of
the graph, let D = Vargs \(Xargs ∪C1 ∪· · ·∪CpC ), and let G′ = G[Xargs ∪D]. Now relabel G1
and G′ in a similar way to Lemma 55. We can see that π p·pC |V (G1 ) is an automorphism of
G1 and π p |V (G′ ) is an automorphism of G′ by an argument similar to the proof for g̃. By an
argument similar to Lemma 6 in Chapter 2, we have G′ ∈ G
                                                       e1 (t, x, k−pC |C|) if G\Xargs has

exactly two connected components, and we have G′ ∈ G    e≥2 (t, x, k − pC |C|) otherwise. In
                                                                                           
                                         12                                  t     x |C|
either case, we have G1 ∈ G1 (t, x, |C|). Therefore, we have G1 ∈ G1
                          e                                          e
                                                                       p · pC MX C
and either G2 ∈ G e1 t x k − pC |C|                   e≥2 t x k − pC |C|
                                              or G2 ∈ G                           , so g̃≥2 is
                      p MX MK \ C π                        p MX MK \ C π
at most the summation above.
   We now show that g̃≥2 is bounded below by this summation. For the first case,
                                                                                           ′
                                                                                            
                              ′                                                  t  x    k
suppose we are given 1 ≤ k ≤ k, a set M ∈ Pk′ , a graph G1 ∈ G              e1                ,
                                                                                p  M X   M
                                               k − k′                        k − k′
                                                                                 
                                   t x                             t x
a graph G2 that belongs to G1 e                           or G≥2
                                                             e                        , and a
                                   p MX MK \ M                     p MX MK \ M
subset Ĉ ⊆ Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ MK ) of size k ′ − |M | that contains s if s ∈
                                                                          / MK . We construct
a graph G as follows: Relabel G1 and G2 in a similar way to Lemma 55, and then glue
G1 and G2 together at Xargs to obtain G. By Lemma 63, π p |V (G) is an automorphism of
G. By the proof of Lemma 6 in Chapter 2, we have G ∈ G      e≥2 (t, x, k).13 Therefore, we
                           
have G ∈ Ge≥2 t x         k
                              .
               p MX MK                                                                 
                                                                           t    x |C|
   For the second case, suppose we are given C ∈ Q, a graph G1 ∈ G1 e                     ,
                                                                        p · pC MX C
  11
     See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.
  12
     See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.
  13
     See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.


                                              149
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                         Chapter 3

                                                                                     
                   ′               t x k − pC |C|                     t x k − pC |C|
and a graph G that belongs to G1
                               e                             or G≥2
                                                                e                         .
                                   p MX MK \ C π                      p MX MK \ C π
We construct a graph G as follows: Let G2 , . . . , GpC all be equal to G1 initially. Next,
relabel G1 , . . . , GpC and G′ in a similar way to Lemma 55. For all i ∈ [pC ], glue the
graph Gi to G′ at Xargs , and let G be the resulting graph. We can see that π p |V (G)
is an automorphism of G by an argument similar to the proof for g̃. By an argument
similar to Lemma 6 in Chapter 2, we have G ∈ G      e≥2 (t, x, k).14 Therefore, we have
                   
G∈G  e≥2 t x      k
                      , so g̃ is at least the summation above.
          p MX MK

Lemma 53 For f , we have
                      
       t x    ℓ     k
  f                      =
       p MX ML MK
     k
                                 ℓ k′                 k − k′
         X k − |MK |  t x                                 
  X
                         ˜               t−2  x+ℓ            x
                        f              g                         ,
    ′
            k ′ − |M |     p MX ML M      p  MX ∪ ML MK \ M MX
  k =1 M ∈I   k′


where Ik′ = {M ⊆πp MK : |MK | − k + k ′ ≤ |M | ≤ k ′ }.
                                          
                        t x       ℓ     k
    Proof: Let G = F                        . To prove this recurrence, we will first
                        p MX ML MK
describe a map from G to the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , M, Â) with the properties given
below, which will imply that f is at most the summation above. Next, to show that f is at
least the summation above, we will describe a map from the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , M, Â)
to G. Strictly speaking, to prove these two bounds (≤ and ≥), it remains to show that
both of these maps are injective. See Remark 2.
    Let args, args1 , and args2 be the arguments of f , f˜, and g, respectively. To see that
                                                                       
                                                      t x       ℓ     k
f is at most the summation above, suppose G ∈ F                           . Let A be the set
                                                      p MX ML MK
of vertices in components C of G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ) such that C evaporates at time exactly
t−1 in G with exception set Xargs , and let B be the set of vertices of all other components
of G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ). Let G1 = G[Xargs ∪ Largs ∪ A], G2 = G[Xargs ∪ Largs ∪ B], k ′ = |A|,
  14
       See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.

                                              150
 Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                     Chapter 3


 M = A ∩ MK , and Â = A \ M . Note that |Â| = k ′ − |M |. By Lemma 61, A is invariant
 under π p , and so is M . Since G has the automorphism π p |V (G) , by Lemma 62 this means
 G1 has the automorphism π p |V (G1 ) and G2 has the automorphism π p |V (G2 ) . We also have
 M ∈ Ik′ . Now relabel G1 and G2 so that they have the desired vertex sets, in a similar
 way to Lemma 54. By the proof of Lemma 2 in Chapter 2, we have G1 ∈ Fe(t, x, ℓ, k ′ )
                                                                                      ′
                                                                                       
                                  ′   15                               t  x     ℓ   k
 and G2 ∈ G(t − 2, x + ℓ, k − k , x). Therefore, we have G1 ∈ Fe                          and
                                                                       p M X   M  L M
                                k − k′
                                              
             t−2      x+ℓ                    x
 G2 ∈ G                                         , so f is at most the summation above.
               p     MX ∪ ML MK \ M MX
     We now show that f is bounded below by this summation. Suppose we are given
                                                                    ℓ k′
                                                                         
         ′                                                 t x
 1 ≤ k ≤ k, a set M ∈ Ik′ , a graph G1 ∈ F             e                    , a graph G2 ∈
                                                          p MX ML M
                           k − k′
                                        
     t−2         x+ℓ                  x
 G                                         , and a subset Â ⊆ Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ∪ MK )
       p      MX ∪ ML MK \ M MX
 of size k ′ − |M |. We construct a graph G as follows: Relabel G1 and G2 so that they have
 the desired vertex sets, including the clique Xargs ∪ Largs (in a similar way to Lemma 54),
 and then glue G1 and G2 together at Xargs ∪Largs to obtain G. By Lemma 63, π p |V (G) is an
 automorphism of G. By the proof of Lemma 2 in Chapter 2, we have G ∈ F (t, x, ℓ, k).16
                                   
                    t x    ℓ     k
 Therefore, G ∈ F                    , so f is at least the summation above.
                   p MX ML MK

 Lemma 56 For f˜, we have
                                            
   ˜   t x      ℓ    k        ˜    t x    ℓ  k
   f                        = fp
      p MX ML MK                  p MX ML MK
                                            k′ ˜ t x     k − k′
          
       X k − |MK |                                          
                             t−1     x+ℓ              ℓ
   +                    g̃1                    f
        ′
            k ′ − |M |         p    MX ∪ ML M p p MX ML MK \ M
        1≤k ≤k
        M ∈Ik′
  X k − |MK | t − 1         k′                  k − k′
                                                          
                        x+ℓ           t−1  x+ℓ            x
+               g̃≥2               g̃                         ,
   ′
     k ′ − |M |      p MX ∪ ML M p     p  MX ∪ ML MK \ M MX
 1≤k ≤k
 M ∈Ik′


 where Ik′ = {M ⊆πp MK : |MK | − k + k ′ ≤ |M | ≤ k ′ }.
   15
        See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.
   16
        See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.


                                             151
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                            Chapter 3

                                                               
                                              t x      ℓ      k
   Proof: Let G be the set of graphs in F e                       such that at least one
                                             p MX ML MK
component of G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ) sees all of Xargs ∪ Largs . To prove (the second and
third cases of) this recurrence, we will first describe a map from G to the set of tuples
(G1 , G2 , k ′ , M, Â) with the properties given below, which will imply that f is at most
the summation above. Next, to show that f is at least the summation above, we will
describe a map from the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , M, Â) to G. Strictly speaking, to prove
these two bounds (≤ and ≥), it remains to show that both of these maps are injective.
See Remark 2.
       Let args be the arguments of f˜, and let args1 , args2 , args3 , args4 , and args5 be the
arguments of f˜p (the first one), g̃1 , f˜p (the second one), g̃≥2 , and g̃p , respectively. To see
                                                                                    
                                                               t     x     ℓ      k
that f˜ is at most the summation above, suppose G ∈ Fe                                 . The graph
                                                               p MX ML MK
G falls into one of three cases: either zero, one, or at least two components of G \ (Xargs ∪
                                                                                             
                                                                         t      x    ℓ      k
Largs ) see all of Xargs ∪ Largs . In the first case, we have G ∈ Fep                           . If
                                                                         p MX ML MK
G falls into the second or third case, then let A be the set of vertices in the components
that see all of Xargs ∪ Largs , and let B be the set of vertices of all other components of
G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ). Let G1 = G[Xargs ∪ Largs ∪ A], G2 = G[Xargs ∪ Largs ∪ B], k ′ = |A|,
M = A ∩ MK , and Â = A \ M . Note that |Â| = k ′ − |M |. By Lemma 61, Largs is
invariant under π p , which implies that A is invariant under π p (and so is M ). Since
G has the automorphism π p |V (G) , by Lemma 62 this means G1 has the automorphism
π p |V (G1 ) and G2 has the automorphism π p |V (G2 ) . We also have M ∈ Ik′ . Now relabel
G1 and G2 so that they have the desired vertex sets, in a similar way to Lemma 54.
If A consists of exactly one component of G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ), then by the proof of
Lemma 5 in Chapter 2, we have G1 ∈ G   e1 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ ) and G2 ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k − k ′ ),17
                                              ′                                              ′
                                                                                            
                         t − 1  x +  ℓ      k                      t   x      ℓ      k  −  k
which implies G1 ∈ Ge1                            and G2 ∈ Fep                                   .
                           p   MX ∪ ML M                           p MX ML MK \ M
Otherwise, by the proof of Lemma 5 in Chapter 2, we have G1 ∈ G      e≥2 (t − 1, x + ℓ, k ′ ) and
  17
       See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.
                                                152
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                 Chapter 3

                                                                                          k′
                                                                                            
                                ′      18                             t−1       x+ℓ
G2 ∈ Gp (t − 1, x + ℓ, k − k , x), which implies G1 ∈ G≥2
       e                                                       e                               and
                                                                        p    MX ∪ ML M
                                    k − k′
                                                  
G2 ∈ G ep t − 1       x+ℓ                       x
                                                    . Hence f˜ is at most the summation above.
              p     MX ∪ ML MK \ M MX
    We now show that f˜ is bounded below by this summation. First of all, every graph
                                                                  
        t x         ℓ      k                      t x       ℓ     k
in Fp
   e                            belongs to F  e                        . For the second and third
        p MX ML MK                                p MX ML MK
case, suppose we are given 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, a set M ∈ Ik′ , a subset Â ⊆ Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ∪
                                                                                          k′
                                                                                            
                ′                                                     t−1       x+ℓ
MK ) of size k − |M |, and either a pair of graphs G1 ∈ G1       e                             and
                                                                        p MX ∪ ML M
                                     ′                                                           ′
                                                                                                 
           t    x      ℓ      k −  k                                       t − 1    x + ℓ      k
G2 ∈ Fep                                  or a pair of graphs G1 ∈ G e≥2
          p M     X   M  L   M K  \ M                                        p    MX ∪ ML M
                                                ′
                                                       
and G2 ∈ G   ep t − 1        x+ℓ          k−k        x
                                                          . We construct a graph G as follows:
                    p      MX ∪ ML MK \ M MX
Relabel G1 and G2 so that they have the desired vertex sets, including the clique
Xargs ∪ Largs (in a similar way to Lemma 54), and then glue G1 and G2 together at
Xargs ∪ Largs to obtain G. By Lemma 63, we know π p |V (G) is an automorphism of
G. By the proof of Lemma 5 in Chapter 2, we have G ∈ Fe(t, x, ℓ, k).19 Therefore,
                      
       t x      ℓ    k
G∈Fe                    , so f˜ is at least the summation above.
       p MX ML MK
                                                                           
                     t x   ℓ  k                                 t  x  ℓ  k  x
Lemma 59 We have f˜p                                      = f˜p                .
                     p MX ML MK                                 p MX ML MK MX

        Proof: This is similar to the proof that f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k) = f˜p (t, x, ℓ, k, x) in Chapter 2 (see
Lemma 8). The only difference is that both sides now have the automorphism π p |V (G) ,
and the relevant vertex subsets are Vargs , Xargs , and Largs .


Lemma 60 For f˜p with the argument z, we have

                                                                               x′ + ℓ′  k′
                                                                                        
         ˜    t x  ℓ  k  z                        X          X            t−1
         fp                  =                                       g̃1
             p MX ML MK MZ                                                 p  MX′ ∪ ML′ M
                                                1≤k′ ≤k   M ∈Pk′
                                                0≤x′ ≤x    ′ ∈I
                                                          MX    x′
                                                0≤ℓ′ ≤ℓ    ′ ∈J
                                                          ML    ℓ′
                                                 ′  ′
                                              0<x +ℓ <x+ℓ


  18
       See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.
  19
       See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.

                                                   153
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                        Chapter 3

                                                         
                                                          k−|M   K|
                                                                   
                                   
                                     ℓ − |ML |
                                                         
                                                              ′
                                                             k −|M |
                                                                               if s ∈ MK
                                  · ′            ′
                                                       ·
                                     ℓ − |ML |                       K|
                                                          k−1−|M
                                                                         
                                                         
                                                              ′
                                                             k −1−|M |
                                                                               otherwise
                                    
                                     x−|M     X|
                                                                         if ℓ′ > 0 or MX′ ̸⊆ MZ
                                    
                                                  
                                         ′     ′
                                        x −|MX |
                                  ·
                                     x−|M     X|        z−|MZ |
                                                                
                                               ′ | − x′ −|M ′ |          otherwise
                                    
                                        x′ −|MX                 X
                                                                                             !
                                                           ′                ′             ′
                                             t       x +  ℓ         ℓ −   ℓ        k −  k   z
                                      f˜
                                    
                                                                                                  if ℓ′ < ℓ
                                    
                                    
                                     p p MX ∪ ML′ ML \ ML′ MK \ M MZ
                                    
                                    
                                  ·                                                       !
                                    
                                           t−1          x+ℓ             k − k′       z
                                    g̃p
                                    
                                                                                                 otherwise
                                               p       MX ∪ ML′ MK \ M MZ
                                    


                                                  x′ + ℓ′
                                   X t − 1                               
                                                           |C|    ℓ − |ML |
                        +             g̃1                      · ′
                                    ′
                                          p · pC MX′ ∪ ML′ C      ℓ − |ML′ |
                               0≤x ≤x
                                0≤ℓ′ ≤ℓ
                             0<x′ +ℓ′ <x+ℓ
                            (C,MX′ ,M ′ )∈Q
                                      L

                                  
                                   x−|MX |                       if ℓ′ > 0 or MX′ ̸⊆ MZ
                                  
                                           
                                             ′ |
                                       x′ −|MX
                              ·
                                 x−|M    X|       z−|MZ |
                                                         
                                
                                     ′    ′
                                    x −|MX |
                                               −    ′   ′
                                                  x −|MX |
                                                                otherwise
                                                                                    !
                                                      ′           ′
                                        t      x + ℓ         ℓ − ℓ     k − p C |C| z
                                  f˜
                                
                                                                                                  if ℓ′ < ℓ
                                
                                
                                 p p MX ∪ ML′ ML \ ML′ MK \ C π MZ
                                
                                
                              ·                                                 !
                                
                                      t−1         x+ℓ         k − pC |C| z
                                g̃p                                                              otherwise.
                                
                                
                                          p      MX ∪ ML′ MK \ C π MZ
                                

                                                                                    
                                                    t    x      ℓ          k      z
      Proof: Let Ginv be the set of graphs G ∈ Fep                                      such that C is
                                                    p MX ML MK MZ
invariant under π p , where C is the connected component of G\(Xargs ∪Largs ) that contains
                                                 
                         t   x      ℓ    k     z
s, and let Gmove = Fep                              \ Ginv . To prove this recurrence, we will
                         p MX ML MK MZ
first describe a map from Ginv to the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , x′ , ℓ′ , M, MX′ , ML′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ , L̂′ )
with the properties given below, and then we will describe a map from Gmove to the set
of tuples (G1 , G′ , x′ , ℓ′ , C, MX′ , ML′ , X̂ ′ , L̂′ ) given below. This will imply that f˜p is at most
the summation above. Next, to show that f˜p is at least the summation above, we will
                                                        154
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                     Chapter 3


describe a map from the set of tuples (G1 , G2 , k ′ , x′ , ℓ′ , M, MX′ , ML′ , Ĉ, X̂ ′ , L̂′ ) to Ginv , as
well as a map from the set of tuples (G1 , G′ , x′ , ℓ′ , C, MX′ , ML′ , X̂ ′ , L̂′ ) to Gmove . Strictly
speaking, to prove these two bounds (≤ and ≥), it remains to show that all of these maps
are injective. See Remark 2.
    Let args be the arguments of f˜p . To see that f˜p is at most the summation above,
                                          
                  t     x     ℓ    k     z
suppose G ∈ Fep                              . Let C be the set of vertices in the component
                  p MX ML MK MZ
of G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ) that contains s. Let X ′ = N (C) ∩ Xargs , L′ = N (C) ∩ Largs , MX′ =
X ′ ∩MX , and ML′ = L′ ∩ML . There are two possible cases: either C is invariant under π p ,
or all of C is mapped to some other component of G\(Xargs ∪Largs ) by π p . If we are in the
first case, then let D be the set of vertices of all other components of G\(Xargs ∪Largs ). Let
G1 = G[X ′ ∪L′ ∪C], G2 = G[Xargs ∪Largs ∪D], k ′ = |C|, x′ = |X ′ |, ℓ′ = |L′ |, M = C ∩MK ,
Ĉ = C \ M , X̂ ′ = X ′ \ MX′ , and L̂′ = L′ \ ML′ . Note that |Ĉ| = k ′ − |M |, |X̂ ′ | = x′ − |MX′ |,
and |L̂′ | = ℓ′ − |ML′ |. If ℓ′ = 0 and MX′ ⊆ MZ , then we know X̂ ′ ̸⊆ Zargs since G \ Zargs
is connected. Since C is invariant under π p , this means N (C) is also invariant under
π p . Therefore, by Lemma 62, π p |V (G1 ) is an automorphism of G1 and π p |V (G2 ) is an
automorphism of G2 . Furthermore, L′ is invariant under π p since Largs is invariant under
π p , so MX ∪ML′ and ML \ML′ are both invariant under π p . Since |MX′ | ≤ x′ and |ML′ | ≤ ℓ′ ,
we have MX′ ∈ Ix′ and ML′ ∈ Jℓ′ . We also have M ∈ Pk′ by an argument similar to
the proof for g̃. Now relabel G1 and G2 in a similar way to Lemma 55. By the proof of
Lemma 9 in Chapter 2, we have G2 ∈ Fep (t, x + ℓ′ , ℓ − ℓ′ , k − k ′ , z) if ℓ′ < ℓ, and we have
G2 ∈ Gep (t−1, x+ℓ, k−k ′ , z) otherwise. In either case, we have G1 ∈ G   e1 (t−1, x′ +ℓ′ , k ′ ).20
                                              x + ℓ′      ℓ − ℓ′      k − k′
                                                                                      
                                        t                                           z
Therefore, we either have G2 ∈ Fp   e                                                    or G2 ∈
                                       p MX ∪ ML′ ML \ ML′ MK \ M MZ
                                 ′                                                ′    ′     ′
                                                                                             
    t − 1    x  + ℓ     k   −  k     z                              t −  1      x   + ℓ    k
G
ep                                        , and we have G1 ∈ G   e1                                .
      p     MX ∪ ML′ MK \ M MZ                                         p     MX′ ∪ ML′ M
   If we are in the second case, where C is mapped to some other component of
  20
       See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.



                                                    155
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                              Chapter 3


G \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ) by π p , then we know (C, MX′ , ML′ ) ∈ Q by an argument similar
to the proof for g̃. Let x′ = |X ′ |, ℓ′ = |L′ |, X̂ ′ = X ′ \ MX′ , and L̂′ = L′ \ ML′ . As
before, if ℓ′ = 0 and MX′ ⊆ MZ , then we know X̂ ′ ̸⊆ Zargs since G \ Zargs is con-
nected. Let C1 = C, X1′ = X ′ , and L′1 = L′ . For 2 ≤ i ≤ pC , let Ci = π p (Ci−1 ),
            ′
Xi′ = π p (Xi−1 ), and L′i = π p (L′i−1 ). Let Gi = G[Xi′ ∪ L′i ∪ Ci ] for i ∈ [pC ]. For
the remainder of the graph, let D = Vargs \ (Xargs ∪ Largs ∪ C1 ∪ · · · ∪ CpC ), and let
G′ = G[Xargs ∪ Largs ∪ D]. Now relabel G1 and G′ in a similar way to Lemma 55. We
can see that π p·pC |V (G1 ) is an automorphism of G1 and π p |V (G′ ) is an automorphism of
G′ by an argument similar to the proof for g̃. By an argument similar to Lemma 9 in
Chapter 2, we have G′ ∈ Fep (t, x + ℓ′ , ℓ − ℓ′ , k − pC |C|, z) if ℓ′ < ℓ, and we have G′ ∈
ep (t−1, x+ℓ, k −pC |C|, z) otherwise. In either case, we have G1 ∈ G
G                                                                       e1 (t−1, x′ +ℓ′ , |C|).21
                                              x + ℓ′     ℓ − ℓ′
                                                                                     
                              ′         t                          k − pC |C| z
Therefore, we have either G ∈ Fp    e                ′          ′            π          or G′ ∈
                                        p  M   X ∪ M L M  L \ M L M  K  \ C     M  Z
                                                                                 ′    ′
                                                                                            
      t − 1    x + ℓ    k − p C |C|    z                            t −  1     x   + ℓ     |C|
G
ep                                          , and we have G1 ∈ Ge1                               ,
        p    MX ∪ ML′ MK \ C π MZ                                   p · pC MX′ ∪ ML′ C
so f˜p is at most the summation above.
       We now show that f˜p is bounded below by this summation. For the first case, suppose
we are given 1 ≤ k ′ ≤ k, 0 ≤ x′ ≤ x, 0 ≤ ℓ′ ≤ ℓ such that 0 < x′ + ℓ′ < x + ℓ, a set
                                                                                    ′      ′     ′
                                                                                                  
                    ′                    ′                              t − 1     x    + ℓ     k
M ∈ Pk′ , a set MX ∈ Ix′ , a set ML ∈ Jℓ′ , a graph G1 ∈ G         e1                                ,
                                                                          p     MX′ ∪ ML′ M
                                           x + ℓ′      ℓ − ℓ′     k − k′
                                  
                                    t                                         z
a graph G2 such that G2 ∈ Fep                     ′           ′                       if ℓ′ < ℓ and
                                    p  M   X ∪  ML  M L \ M  L M  K  \ M    M Z
                                        ′
          
            t − 1     x  + ℓ      k − k       z
G2 ∈ G ep                                           otherwise, a subset Ĉ ⊆ Vargs \ (Xargs ∪
              p    MX ∪ ML′ MK \ M MZ
Largs ∪ MK ) of size k ′ − |M | that contains s if s ∈/ MK , a subset X̂ ′ ⊆ Xargs \ MX of size
x′ − |MX′ | such that M ′ ∪ X̂ ′ ̸⊆ Zargs , and a subset L̂′ ⊆ Largs \ ML of size ℓ′ − |ML′ |.
We construct a graph G as follows: Relabel G1 and G2 in a similar way to Lemma 55,
and then glue G1 and G2 together at X ′ ∪ L′ to obtain G. By Lemma 63, π p |V (G) is an
automorphism of G. By the proof of Lemma 9 in Chapter 2, we have G ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, z).22
  21
       See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.
  22
       See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.
                                                 156
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                            Chapter 3

                                                           
                                t x           ℓ     k    z
Therefore, we have G ∈ Fp   e                                  .
                                p MX ML MK MZ
    For the second case, suppose we are given 0 ≤ x′ ≤ x, 0 ≤ ℓ′ ≤ ℓ such that 0 <
                                                                                  x′ + ℓ′
                                                                                               
  ′   ′                           ′       ′                               t−1                |C|
x + ℓ < x + ℓ, a triple (C, MX , ML ) ∈ Q, a graph G1 ∈ G1           e             ′       ′      ,
                                                                          p · pC MX ∪ ML     C
                                            x + ℓ′      ℓ − ℓ′
                                 
                                    t                              k − pC |C| z
a graph G′ such that G′ ∈ Fep                      ′             ′           π       if ℓ′ < ℓ and
                                   p    M  X  ∪ M L M L \ M    L M  K \  C    MZ
             t − 1    x + ℓ     k −   p C |C|    z
G′ ∈ G  ep                                            otherwise, a subset X̂ ′ ⊆ Xargs \ MX of
               p   MX ∪ ML′ MK \ C π MZ
size x′ − |MX′ | such that M ′ ∪ X̂ ′ ̸⊆ Zargs , and a subset L̂′ ⊆ Largs \ ML of size ℓ′ − |ML′ |.
We construct a graph G as follows: Let G2 , . . . , GpC all be equal to G1 initially. Next,
relabel G1 , . . . , GpC and G′ in a similar way to Lemma 55. For all i ∈ [pC ], glue the graph
Gi to G′ at π p(i−1) (X ′ ∪ L′ ), and let G be the resulting graph. We can see that π p |V (G)
is an automorphism of G by an argument similar to the proof for g̃. By an argument
similar to Lemma 9 in Chapter 2, we have G ∈ Fep (t, x, ℓ, k, z).23 Therefore, we have
                            
          t  x   ℓ    k   z
G ∈ Fep                        , so f˜p is at least the summation above.
         p MX ML MK MZ


3.5.3        Running time

       The running time is dominated by the arithmetic operations needed to compute f˜p .
In the first part of the recurrence for f˜p (corresponding to when C is invariant under
π p ), there are three summations that sum over at most n possible values (the sums over
k ′ , x′ , and ℓ′ ), and there are three summations that sum over at most 2µ possible values
(the sums over M , MX′ , and ML′ ). As for the arguments, there are six arguments whose
values are at most n (t, x, ℓ, k, z, p), and there are four arguments that are sets of moved
points with at most 2µ possible values (MX , ML , MK ). The analysis for the second part
of the recurrence (when C is not invariant) is similar. Therefore, the overall running time
is O(27µ n9 ).
  23
       See Footnote 3 in Lemma 54.



                                               157
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                 Chapter 3


3.5.4      Sampling labeled chordal graphs with a given automor-

           phism

    The algorithm for Sample Chordal Lab(n, π) is given by the following theorem.


Theorem 7 There is a randomized algorithm that given n ∈ N and π ∈ Sn , generates a
graph uniformly at random from the set of all labeled chordal graphs with vertex set [n]
for which π is an automorphism. This algorithm uses O(27µ n9 ) arithmetic operations,
where µ = |Mπ |.


    In Chapter 2, the authors used the standard sampling-to-counting reduction of [1] to
derive an algorithm for sampling labeled chordal graphs from the corresponding counting
algorithm. For labeled chordal graphs with a given automorphism, Theorem 7 follows
from Theorem 6 in exactly the same way.



3.6       Bound on the Number of Labeled Chordal Graphs

          with Automorphism π

    In this section, we prove a bound on the number of n-vertex labeled chordal graphs
that have a given automorphism π, in terms of n and the number of moved points of π
(Theorem 8). To do this, we begin by bounding the number of graphs of this form that
have a given perfect elimination ordering (PEO) and a given maximum clique size. In
fact, we only need to consider PEOs that delete some maximum clique of G as late as
possible. The following observation shows that every chordal graph has such a PEO.


Observation 7 For every n-vertex chordal graph G with maximum clique size ω, there
exists a PEO v1 , . . . , vn of G such that G \ {v1 , . . . , vn−ω } is a clique of size ω.

                                                 158
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                         Chapter 3


     Proof: Let C be a maximum clique in G. For each i ∈ [n − ω], by Lemma 40 we can
always find a vertex vi that is simplicial in G \ {v1 , . . . , vi−1 } and does not belong to C.
After that, the remaining ω vertices of the graph can be added to the PEO in any order,
since all of these are simplicial in G \ {v1 , . . . , vn−ω }.
    Suppose G is an n-vertex chordal graph with automorphism π and maximum clique
size ω. Imagine that we delete the vertices of G in order according to a given PEO that
has the property from Observation 7. For our purposes, it makes sense to truncate this
PEO once the graph that remains becomes a clique of size ω because at that point, there
is only one possibility for the edges of the remaining graph. A truncated PEO of an
n-vertex chordal graph G with maximum clique size ω is an ordering v1 , . . . , vn−ω of a
subset S ⊆ V (G) such that V (G) \ S is a clique of size ω and such that v1 , . . . , vn−ω can
be extended to a perfect elimination ordering v1 , . . . , vn of G. By Observation 7, every
chordal graph has a truncated PEO.
    For most of the lemmas in this section, we will count graphs that have the truncated
PEO 1, 2, . . . , n − ω. For n ∈ N, 1 ≤ ω ≤ n, and π ∈ Sn , let απ (n, ω) denote the number
of labeled chordal graphs G with vertex set [n] and maximum clique size exactly ω such
that π is an automorphism of G and such that 1, 2, . . . , n − ω is a truncated PEO of G.
Let Aπ (n, ω) denote the set of such graphs.
    We only need to bound the number of graphs with this particular truncated PEO
because the number of graphs is the same regardless of which truncated PEO we choose.
More formally, suppose v1 , v2 , . . . , vn−ω is an ordering of a subset of [n] of size n − ω.
For n, ω, and π as above, let βπ (n, ω) denote the number of labeled chordal graphs G
with vertex set [n] and maximum clique size exactly ω such that π is an automorphism
of G and such that v1 , v2 , . . . , vn−ω is a truncated PEO of G. Note that απ (n, ω) and
βπ (n, ω) have different truncated PEOs. The following observation shows that this makes
no difference.
                                                 159
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                             Chapter 3


Observation 8 Let n ∈ N, 1 ≤ ω ≤ n, π ∈ Sn . We have απ (n, ω) = βπ (n, ω).


       Proof: Let v1 , . . . , vn be an ordering of [n] that begins with v1 , . . . , vn−ω , and let
ψ : [n] → [n] be the bijection defined by ψ(i) = vi for all i ∈ [n]. We have the following
bijection between απ (n, ω) and βπ (n, ω): given a graph G ∈ απ (n, ω), relabel the vertices
of G by applying ψ to the label of each vertex.
      Our goal is now to prove a bound on απ (n, ω). It will be useful to consider two
different cases having to do with which points are moved by π.


      Two cases for the moved points. Suppose we are given n ∈ N, 1 ≤ ω ≤ n, and
π ∈ Sn . Let Ĉ = {n − ω + 1, n − ω + 2, . . . , n}. This is the clique of size ω that would
remain after deleting the truncated PEO 1, 2, . . . , n − ω from a graph G ∈ Aπ (n, ω). Let
µ = |Mπ |. The permutation π falls into one of the following cases:

  1. |Mπ ∩ Ĉ| ≤ 9µ
                 10
                                    9
                    , i.e., at most 10 of the moved points of π belong to Ĉ

  2. |Mπ ∩ Ĉ| > 9µ
                 10
                    .

We prove bounds for these two cases in Lemmas 71 and 72. However, Lemma 71 assumes
ω ≥ 9n
    20
       and µ ≤ 4n
                5
                  , and Lemma 72 assumes ω ≤ n − µ5 . We begin by dealing with the
corresponding edge cases (when ω is small or close to n, or µ is close to n) in Lemmas 67
to 70 since these cases are relatively simple and use ideas that will also be useful later
on.


Lemma 66 Let n ∈ N, 1 ≤ ω ≤ n. The number of labeled chordal graphs G with vertex
set [n] and maximum clique size exactly ω such that 1, 2, . . . , n − ω is a truncated PEO
of G is at most
                                             nn 2ω(n−ω) .


                                                 160
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                          Chapter 3


     Proof: For 0 ≤ i ≤ n − ω, let Ai denote the set of labeled chordal graphs G
with vertex set {n − ω − i + 1, . . . , n} and maximum clique size exactly ω such that
n − ω − i + 1, . . . , n − ω is a truncated PEO of G. We prove |Ai | ≤ ni 2ωi by induction on
i, for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − ω}. When i = 0, there is just one graph in A0 , namely a clique
of size ω. Now let i ∈ [n − ω] and suppose the statement is true for i − 1. If we delete the
vertex with label n − ω − i + 1 from a graph G ∈ Ai , then the resulting graph (say G′ )
belongs to Ai−1 . We claim that there are at most n2ω possibilities for the neighborhood
of this vertex in G. The neighborhood must be a clique since this vertex is simplicial in
G, and thus it is contained in some maximal clique of G′ . By Lemma 41, G′ has at most
n maximal cliques. To choose this neighborhood, we can first choose a maximal clique
of G′ (which has size at most ω) and then choose a subset of it. Therefore, there are at
most n2ω possibilities. Since G′ ∈ Ai−1 , the number of possible graphs in Ai is at most
n2ω |Ai−1 | ≤ n2ω ni−1 2ω(i−1) ≤ ni 2ωi . This gives us the desired bound when i = n − ω.
   We can use Lemma 66 to bound the number of chordal graphs with small or large
values of ω.

Lemma 67 Let n ∈ N, 1 ≤ ω < 9n
                            20
                               . The number of labeled chordal graphs G with vertex
set [n] and maximum clique size exactly ω such that 1, 2, . . . , n − ω is a truncated PEO
of G is at most
                                             2         2
                                        nn 2n /4−n /400 .

     Proof: By Lemma 66, the number of such graphs is at most

                                                                   2   2
                       nn 2ω(n−ω) = nn 2(n/2+∆)(n/2−∆) = nn 2(n/2) −∆ ,

                                        2
where ∆ = n2 − ω. We know ∆2 > 400
                               n
                                   since ω < 9n
                                             20
                                                , so this proves the bound.

Lemma 68 Let n ∈ N, 3n
                     5
                       < ω ≤ n. The number of labeled chordal graphs G with vertex
set [n] and maximum clique size exactly ω such that 1, 2, . . . , n − ω is a truncated PEO
                                                 161
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                           Chapter 3


of G is at most
                                              2         2
                                         nn 2n /4−n /100 .


     Proof: Similarly to Lemma 67, the number of such graphs is at most

                                                             2   2
                                   nn 2ω(n−ω) = nn 2(n/2) −∆ ,

                                         n              2
where ∆ = ω − n2 this time. We know ∆2 > 100 since ω > 3n
                                                        5
                                                          , so this proves the bound.




Lemma 69 Let n ∈ N, π ∈ Sn , and suppose n − µ5 < ω ≤ n, where µ = |Mπ |. The
number of labeled chordal graphs G with vertex set [n] and maximum clique size exactly
ω such that 1, 2, . . . , n − ω is a truncated PEO of G is at most

                                              2         2
                                         nn 2n /4−n /100 .


     Proof: This follows immediately from Lemma 68 since µ ≤ n, and thus ω > 4n
                                                                              5
                                                                                .
    Next, we will deal with the case when µ > 4n
                                               5
                                                 (Lemma 70). When a graph Ĝ has an
automorphism π, it is necessary that every subgraph G of Ĝ “respects” π, in the sense
that the edges of G obey whichever properties are required by π. More precisely, this
requirement is defined as follows. In Definition 6, one can think of G as being a subgraph
of a graph with vertex set [n] for which π is an automorphism.


Definition 6 Let n ∈ N, π ∈ Sn , and let G be a labeled graph such that V (G) ⊆ [n]. We
say G respects π if whenever a pair of vertices a, b ∈ V (G) and a number 0 ≤ p ≤ n − 1
satisfy π p (a), π p (b) ∈ V (G), we have the following: a is adjacent to b if and only if π p (a)
is adjacent to π p (b).


    For a graph G with vertex set [n], G respects π if and only if π is an automorphism
of G. Imagine that we build up a graph G ∈ Aπ (n, ω) by starting with an empty vertex
                                                  162
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                        Chapter 3


set and then adding each of the vertices n, n − 1, . . . , 1 to the graph, in that order. It is
clear that the current graph must respect π at every step of this process.
   Next, the following definition will be useful for bounding the number of possible
neighborhoods of a vertex.

Definition 7 Let n ∈ N, 1 ≤ ω ≤ n, π ∈ Sn . Let 1 ≤ a ≤ n − ω, let V ′ = {a + 1, . . . , n},
and let b ∈ [n] be the largest number in the cycle of π that contains a. For c ∈ N, we
say the element a is 1c -retrospective with respect to ω and π if a ̸= b and the following
holds: for every M ⊆ V ′ such that ω − ωc ≤ |M | ≤ ω, we have
                                                           ω
                                     |π p (M ) ∩ V ′ | ≥     ,
                                                           c
where p is the number such that π p (a) = b.

   To see the intuition behind Definition 7, again imagine that we build up a graph
G ∈ Aπ (n, ω) by adding the vertices n, n−1, . . . , 1 to the graph, in that order. Each time
we add a vertex a to the current graph (which has vertex set V ′ ), we want to bound the
                                                                      1
number of possible neighborhoods for this vertex. Suppose vertex a is 20 -retrospective.
We know vertex b has already been added to the graph since b > a. The neighborhood
of vertex a is contained in some maximal clique M of G[V ′ ]. If |M | is much smaller than
ω, then there clearly are few possibilities for this neighborhood. On the other hand, if
                                 ω                            1
|M | is close to ω (at least ω − 20 ), then the definition of 20 -retrospective says that a
significant portion of the edges/non-edges from a to vertices in M can be copied from
edges/non-edges incident to b that have already been decided in the past since π is an
automorphism. In particular, the relationship between b and every vertex of π p (M ) ∩ V ′
has already been decided. Therefore, there are strictly fewer than n2ω possibilities for
the neighborhood of vertex a.
   Using this notion, we can prove a bound that is tighter than Lemma 66 for the case
when µ > 4n
          5
            . By the above lemmas, we can assume ω is neither too large nor too small.
                                              163
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                                  Chapter 3


    Suppose we have been given n, ω, π, and 0 ≤ i ≤ n − ω. From now on, let Vi =
{n − ω − i + 1, . . . , n}, and let Ai denote the set of labeled chordal graphs G with vertex
set Vi and maximum clique size exactly ω such that n − ω − i + 1, . . . , n − ω is a truncated
PEO of G and such that G respects π.


Lemma 70 Let n ∈ N, 9n
                    20
                       ≤ ω ≤ 3n
                              5
                                , π ∈ Sn . Let µ = |Mπ |, and suppose µ > 4n
                                                                           5
                                                                             . We
have
                                απ (n, ω) ≤ nn 2ω(n−ω) 2−ωn/300+ω/30 .


       Proof: There are at least 2n
                                  5
                                    vertices in the truncated PEO 1 . . . , n − ω since ω ≤ 3n
                                                                                             5
                                                                                               .
Let B be the set of vertices j from this truncated PEO such that 1 ≤ j ≤ 2n
                                                                          5
                                                                            , j ∈ Mπ ,
                                                                                  n
and j is not the largest number in the cycle of π that contains j. We claim |B| ≥ 10 − 1.
Indeed, since there are only ⌈ 3n
                                5
                                  ⌉ vertices outside of the set {1, 2, . . . , ⌊2n/5⌋} and we have
µ > 4n
     5
       , that means at least 4n
                              5
                                − ⌈ 3n
                                     5
                                       ⌉ ≥ n5 − 1 of the vertices in the set {1, 2, . . . , ⌊2n/5⌋}
are moved by π. At least half of those that are moved are not the largest number in their
                                  n
cycle of π, so this implies |B| ≥ 10 − 1.
    We proceed by a similar argument to the proof of Lemma 66, except we now just want
to count graphs for which π is an automorphism. We prove the following by induction on
i, for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − ω}: |Ai | ≤ ni 2ωi 2−ωk/30 , where k = |B ∩ {n − ω − i + 1, . . . , n}|,
                                                                                         n
i.e., k is the number of vertices in B that belong to the vertex set so far. Since |B| ≥ 10 −1,
this statement with i = n − ω will give us the desired bound.
    When i = 0, there is just one graph in A0 , namely a clique of size ω. Now let i ∈ [n−ω]
and suppose the statement is true for i − 1. Let a = n − ω − i + 1. If we delete the vertex
with label a from a graph G ∈ Ai , then the resulting graph (say G′ ) belongs to Ai−1 . If
 / B, then there are at most n2ω possibilities for the neighborhood of this vertex, as we
a∈
saw in the proof of Lemma 66. Now suppose a ∈ B. In this case, we can prove a tighter
                                     1
bound by showing that this vertex is 30 -retrospective. Let M be a subset of Vi−1 such
                                                  164
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                           Chapter 3


that 29ω
      30
         ≤ |M | ≤ ω. Let p be the number such that π p (a) = b, where b is the largest
number in the cycle of π that contains a. We know |π p (M )| = |M | ≥ 29ω
                                                                       30
                                                                          ≥ 87n
                                                                            200
                                                                                , and
there are at most ⌊ 2n
                     5
                       ⌋ vertices in [n] \ Vi−1 , so there must be at least 87n
                                                                            200
                                                                                − ⌊ 2n
                                                                                     5
                                                                                           n
                                                                                       ⌋ > 30   ω
                                                                                              ≥ 30
                                                 1
vertices of π p (M ) in Vi−1 . Hence vertex a is 30 -retrospective.
   The neighborhood of vertex a is contained in some maximal clique M of G′ . If
|M | < 29ω
        30
           , then there are at most 2ω 2−ω/30 possible subsets of M . If |M | ≥ 29ω
                                                                                 30
                                                                                    , then
we know the following, since G respects π: for every c ∈ π p (M ) ∩ V (G′ ), a is adjacent
to π −p (c) ∈ M if and only if b is adjacent to c in G′ . The rest of the neighborhood of a
                                                 / V (G′ )}, but this set has size at most
could be an arbitrary subset of {d ∈ M : π p (d) ∈
29ω
 30
               1
    since a is 30 -retrospective, so there are at most 2ω 2−ω/30 subsets of M that could be
the neighborhood of a. Overall, since G′ has at most n maximal cliques, there are at
most n2ω 2−ω/30 possibilities for the neighborhood of a.
   Therefore, we have |Ai | ≤ n2ω |Ai−1 | if n − ω − i + 1 ∈
                                                           / B (in which case k remains
the same when going from i to i + 1), and we have |Ai | ≤ n2ω 2−ω/30 |Ai−1 | otherwise (in
which case k increases by 1). This proves the desired bound.
   We are finally ready to prove a bound for case (1), when |Mπ ∩ Ĉ| ≤ 9µ
                                                                        10
                                                                           .

Lemma 71 Let n ∈ N, 9n
                    20
                       ≤ ω ≤ n, π ∈ Sn . Let µ = |Mπ |, and suppose µ ≤ 4n
                                                                         5
                                                                           . Also,
suppose |Mπ ∩ Ĉ| ≤ 9µ
                    10
                       , where Ĉ = {n − ω + 1, n − ω + 2, . . . , n}. In this case, we have

                                απ (n, ω) ≤ nn 2ω(n−ω) 2−ωµ/400 .

     Proof: Let B be the set of vertices j ∈ [n − ω] such that j ∈ Mπ and j is not the
                                                           µ
largest number in the cycle of π that contains j. At least 10 of the vertices in [n − ω] are
moved by π since |Mπ ∩ Ĉ| ≤ 9µ
                             10
                                , and among those that are moved, at least half of them
                                                          µ
are not the largest in their cycle of π. Therefore, |B| ≥ 20 .
   We prove the following by induction on i, for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − ω}: |Ai | ≤
                                                                         µ
ni 2ωi 2−ωk/20 , where k = |B ∩ {n − ω − i + 1, . . . , n}|. Since |B| ≥ 20 , this statement
                                               165
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                             Chapter 3


with i = n − ω will give us the desired bound.
     When i = 0, we have |A0 | = 1. Now let i ∈ [n − ω] and suppose the statement is
true for i − 1. Let a = n − ω − i + 1. If we delete the vertex with label a from a graph
G ∈ Ai , then the resulting graph (say G′ ) belongs to Ai−1 . If a ∈
                                                                   / B, then there are
at most n2ω possibilities for the neighborhood of this vertex. Now suppose a ∈ B. In
                                     1
this case, we claim that vertex a is 20 -retrospective. Let M be a subset of Vi−1 such
that 19ω
      20
                                                                           ω
         ≤ |M | ≤ ω. Suppose for a contradiction that |π p (M ) ∩ Vi−1 | < 20 , where p is
as above. We have |π p (M ) \ Vi−1 | > 18ω
                                        20
                                           since |π p (M )| ≥ 19ω
                                                               20
                                                                  , so π p has at least 2 · 18ω
                                                                                             20

moved points. This means π has at least 9ω
                                         5
                                           ≥ 81n
                                             100
                                                 > 4n
                                                    5
                                                      moved points, since Mπp ⊆ Mπ .
This is a contradiction since we are assuming µ ≤ 4n
                                                   5
                                                                         1
                                                     . Hence vertex a is 20 -retrospective.
By an argument similar to the proof of Lemma 70, this implies that there are at most
n2ω 2−ω/20 possibilities for the neighborhood of a.
     Therefore, we have |Ai | ≤ n2ω |Ai−1 | if n − ω − i + 1 ∈
                                                             / B (in which case k remains
the same), and we have |Ai | ≤ n2ω 2−ω/20 |Ai−1 | otherwise (in which case k increases by
1). This proves the desired bound.
     Lastly, we prove a bound for case (2), when |Mπ ∩ Ĉ| > 9µ
                                                             10
                                                                .

Lemma 72 Let n ∈ N, π ∈ Sn . Suppose 1 ≤ ω ≤ n − µ5 , where µ = |Mπ |. Also, suppose
|Mπ ∩ Ĉ| > 9µ
            10
               , where Ĉ = {n − ω + 1, n − ω + 2, . . . , n}. In this case, we have

                                                          2
                               απ (n, ω) ≤ nn 2ω(n−ω) 2−µ /100+µ/10 .

      Proof: Let D̂ := {v1 , . . . , vn−ω } be the set of vertices outside of Ĉ. There are at least
µ
5
    vertices in D̂ since n ≥ ω + µ5 , and there are at most 10
                                                            µ
                                                               moved vertices in D̂ since
|Mπ ∩ Ĉ| > 9µ
            10
                                               µ
               . Therefore, there are at least 10 vertices in D̂ that are fixed points of
                                                                       µ
π. Out of all of those vertices in D̂ \ Mπ , let B be the set of the ⌊ 10 ⌋ of these with the
largest labels. Note that if G′ is a graph with vertex set {ℓ, ℓ + 1, . . . , n}, where ℓ is the
vertex in B with the smallest label, then |V (G′ )| ≤ ω + µ5 .
                                                166
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                      Chapter 3


   We prove the following by induction on i, for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n − ω}: |Ai | ≤
                                                                         µ
ni 2ωi 2−µk/10 , where k = |B ∩ {n − ω − i + 1, . . . , n}|. Since |B| ≥ 10 − 1, this state-
ment with i = n − ω will give us the desired bound.
   When i = 0, we have |A0 | = 1. Now let i ∈ [n − ω] and suppose the statement is true
for i − 1. Let a = n − ω − i + 1. If we delete the vertex with label a from a graph G ∈ Ai ,
then the resulting graph (say G′ ) belongs to Ai−1 . If a ∈
                                                          / B, then there are at most n2ω
possibilities for the neighborhood of this vertex. Now suppose a ∈ B. The neighborhood
                                                                        µ
of vertex a is contained in some maximal clique M of G′ . If |M | < ω − 10 , then there
are at most 2ω−µ/10 possible subsets of M .
                                    µ
   On the other hand, if |M | ≥ ω − 10 , then we have |V (G′ )| − |M | ≤ 3µ
                                                                         10
                                                                            since |V (G′ )| ≤
ω + µ5 . We say a vertex v ∈ M is singly moved if v is moved by π and belongs to a cycle
C of π such that v is the only vertex in C ∩ M . There are at most 3µ
                                                                   10
                                                                      moved points of
                             µ
π in V (G′ ) \ M and at most 10 in [n] \ V (G′ ), so we have at most 2µ
                                                                      5
                                                                        moved points in
[n] \ M . This means at most 2µ
                              5
                                of the vertices in M are singly moved, since each of those
must belong to a cycle that lies partly outside of M . There are at least µ − 2µ
                                                                               5
                                                                                 = 3µ
                                                                                    5

moved vertices in M in total, so at least 3µ
                                           5
                                             − 2µ
                                                5
                                                  = µ5 of these are not singly moved. For
each of these µ5 vertices, there is at least one other vertex from the same cycle of π that
can also be found in M . Hence it is sufficient to just choose the relationship to a (i.e.,
edge or non-edge) for at most half of these vertices, since vertices in M that belong to
the same cycle of π must have the same relationship to a. Once those choices have been
made, then all of the other edges/non-edges between a and M have also been determined
since G respects π. Overall, since G′ has at most n maximal cliques, there are at most
n2ω 2−µ/10 possibilities for the neighborhood of a.
   Therefore, we have |Ai | ≤ n2ω |Ai−1 | if n − ω − i + 1 ∈
                                                           / B (in which case k remains
the same), and we have |Ai | ≤ n2ω 2−µ/10 |Ai−1 | otherwise (in which case k increases by
1). This proves the desired bound.
                                            167
Sampling Unlabeled Chordal Graphs in Expected Polynomial Time                              Chapter 3


Theorem 8 Let n ∈ N, π ∈ Sn , and let µ = |Mπ |. The number of labeled chordal graphs
with vertex set [n] for which π is an automorphism is at most

                                                     2
                                            n2n+1 2n /4−f (µ) ,

              µ    2µ
where f (µ) = 900 − 10 .


     Proof: Fix a maximum clique size 1 ≤ ω ≤ n. If ω < 9n
                                                        20
                                                           , ω > 3n
                                                                  5
                                                                    , or ω > n − µ5 , then
                                                         2   2
by Lemmas 67 to 69, we have απ (n, ω) ≤ nn 2n /4−n /400 . So from now on, we can assume
9n
20
   ≤ ω ≤ 3n
          5
            and ω ≤ n − µ5 .
   If µ > 4n
           5
             , then by Lemma 70 we have απ (n, ω) ≤ nn 2ω(n−ω) 2−ωn/300+ω/30 . We
                        2
know ω(n − ω) ≤ n4 for all values of ω. Therefore, the bound in this case is at most
     2       2
nn 2n /4−3n /2000+n/30 since ω ≥ 9n
                                 20
                                    . On the other hand, if µ ≤ 4n
                                                                 5
                                                                   , then by Lemmas 71
                                                                                       2
and 72 we either have απ (n, ω) ≤ nn 2ω(n−ω) 2−ωµ/400 or απ (n, ω) ≤ nn 2ω(n−ω) 2−µ /100+µ/10 ,
depending on which vertices are moved by π. The first of these two is bounded above by
     2
nn 2n /4−9µn/8000 since ω ≥ 9n
                            20
                               .
                                                                  2
   Combining all of these bounds yields απ (n, ω) ≤ nn 2n /4−f (n,µ) , where

                                      n2 3n2   n 9µn µ2                       µ2
                                                                     
                                                            µ                      µ
                 f (n, µ) = min          ,    − ,     ,   −               ≥      −
                                      400 2000 30 8000 100 10                 900 10
      3n 2   n    n     2
                        n
since 2000 − 30 ≥ 900 − 10 . There are n possible values of ω, and there are at most nn
possible choices for the truncated PEO of an n-vertex graph. Therefore, by Observation 8,
the number of labeled chordal graphs with vertex set [n] and automorphism π is at most
         2                        µ     2
                                        µ
n2n+1 2n /4−f (µ) , where f (µ) = 900 − 10 .




                                                   168
Chapter 4

Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex
Deletion Problems in FPT Time


4.1      Introduction

   For a graph class G, Vertex Deletion to G is the decision problem where the input
is a graph G and a nonnegative integer k and the goal is to decide whether there exists a
vertex subset S ⊆ V (G) of size at most k such that G \ S ∈ G. In this chapter, we work
with three particular classes of undirected graphs. Let GI be the class of edgeless graphs
(i.e., the independent set graphs), let GC be the class of cluster graphs, and let GS be the
class of split graphs. When the graph class in question is GI , GC , or GS , the problem of
Vertex Deletion to G is known as Vertex Cover, Cluster Vertex Deletion,
or Split Vertex Deletion, respectively. In this chapter, we present algorithms to
solve the corresponding graph counting problems. In particular, for each of the above
graph classes G, we design an FPT algorithm to compute the number of n-vertex graphs
that are yes-instances of Vertex Deletion to G. In other words, given n and k as
input, we compute the number of n-vertex graphs G such that G \ S ∈ G for some

                                            169
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                        Chapter 4


S ⊆ V (G) of size at most k.
   We also consider one class of directed graphs. A tournament is a directed graph G such
that for every pair of vertices u, v ∈ V (G), exactly one of (u, v) or (v, u) is a directed edge
of G. Let GA be the class of acyclic tournaments. The problem of Vertex Deletion
to GA is the decision problem where the input is a tournament G and a nonnegative
integer k and the goal is to decide whether there exists a vertex subset S ⊆ V (G) of size
at most k such that G \ S ∈ GA . This problem is also known as Feedback Vertex
Set in Tournaments. In this chapter, we design an FPT algorithm to compute the
number of n-vertex tournaments that are yes-instances of Vertex Deletion to GA .
   To achieve this, we design a general framework that reduces each of these four counting
problems to a simpler version of the problem with given deletion sets. For each of the
problems in question, we then design an FPT algorithm for the version with given deletion
sets. Overall, the algorithms for counting yes-instances of Vertex Cover, Cluster
Vertex Deletion, and Feedback Vertex Set in Tournaments have running
                 2k+o(k)
time at most 23            · nO(1) , and the running time of the algorithm for counting yes-
instances of Split Vertex Deletion is a triple-exponential function of k. We also
design a faster algorithm for counting yes-instances of Vertex Cover that runs in time
    2
k O(k ) n3 , using ideas inspired by the Buss kernel for that problem.



4.2      Preliminaries

   In this chapter, we implicitly assume all graphs that we consider are labeled graphs.
A directed graph G is acyclic if and only if there is a total order ≤ on V (G) such that
u ≤ v for every directed edge (u, v) [36]. Such an ordering is called a topological ordering.
Furthermore, it is easy to see that every acyclic tournament has a unique topological
ordering. In an undirected graph G, distinct vertices u and v are called true twins if

                                              170
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                       Chapter 4


N (u) = N (v) and (u, v) ∈ E(G). The vertices u and v are false twins if N (u) = N (v)
and (u, v) ∈
           / E(G). An ordered partition is a partition that comes with a total order on
the set of its parts. For a set A, we write 2A to denote the power set of A.



4.3      Framework for Several FPT Graph Counting Al-

         gorithms

    Suppose G is one of our three classes of undirected graphs (GI , GC , or GS ). We are
given n and k as input, and our goal is to compute the number of n-vertex graphs G such
that G \ S ∈ G for some S ⊆ V (G) of size at most k. The main idea of our algorithm is to
repeatedly use the inclusion-exclusion principle to reduce this problem to the following:
given sets S1 , . . . , Sp and n as input, count the number of n-vertex graphs G such that
G \ Si ∈ G for all 1 ≤ i ≤ p. This reduction is essentially the same no matter which
graph class we are dealing with. For the problem that we reduce to, however, each of
the above graph classes needs its own algorithm that is tailored to that particular graph
class.
    The algorithm for counting yes-instances of Feedback Vertex Set in Tourna-
ments follows a similar approach with directed graphs, but for now, we first describe
the algorithm for a class G of undirected graphs.


4.3.1     Reducing to the problem with given sets

    To begin with, we describe a general framework for counting yes-instances of Vertex
Deletion to G, assuming we have an algorithm for the above problem in which the
sets S1 , . . . , Sp are given in the input. The identifier γ will specify which graph class we
are dealing with. For example, Gγ = GI if γ = I.

                                             171
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                Chapter 4


Definition 8 Let γ ∈ {I, C, S}. For a graph G, we say S ⊆ V (G) is a Gγ -deletion set
of G if G \ S ∈ Gγ . We say a Gγ -deletion set S of G is minimal if no proper subset of
S is a Gγ -deletion set of G.


       For every graph class Gγ that we consider, there is a well-known bound on the number
of minimal Gγ -deletion sets of a given graph. Every graph has at most 2k minimal vertex
covers of size at most k since the bounded search tree in the standard branching algorithm
for Vertex Cover has at most 2k leaves. For Cluster Vertex Deletion, the
standard bounded search tree for this problem has at most 3k leaves since a graph is
a cluster graph if and only if it has no induced P3 . Hence every graph has at most 3k
minimal GC -deletion sets of size at most k. For the class of split graphs, a graph is split
if and only if it does not contain a cycle on four or five vertices or a 2K2 (two disjoint
edges) as as induced subgraph. Thus the same bounded search tree argument shows that
every graph has at most 5k minimal GS -deletion sets of size at most k.1
       We define the function gγ (k) to be this bound for each graph class Gγ . In other words,
gI (k) = 2k , gC (k) = 3k , and gS (k) = 5k for all k ≥ 0.


Theorem 9 Let γ ∈ {I, C, S}, and let g(k) = gγ (k). Let n ∈ N, 0 ≤ k ≤ n, and let
S1 , . . . , Sp be subsets of [n] of size at most k, where 1 ≤ p ≤ (k + 1)g(k). Suppose we have
an algorithm that, given n and the sets S1 , . . . , Sp as input, computes the number of graphs
G with vertex set [n] such that G \ Si ∈ Gγ for all i ∈ [p]. Suppose the running time of
this algorithm is f (k)q(n). Then there is an algorithm that given n ∈ N and 0 ≤ k ≤ n,
computes the number of graphs G with vertex set [n] such that G \ S ∈ Gγ for some
S ⊆ V (G) of size at most k. The running time of this algorithm is g(k)O(k·g(k)) f (k)q(n).
                                                                                2
   1
    The FPT algorithm in [82] implies that there are in fact at most 2k+O(log k) minimal GS -deletion
sets of size at most k. However, this is not explicitly stated in that paper, so for completeness, we use
the bound of 5k in our results.



                                                  172
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                            Chapter 4


    To prove Theorem 9, suppose we have been given n and k as input. Let S (1) , . . . , S (r)
be all of the subsets of [n] of size at most k. Note that r = O(knk ). For i ∈ [r], let Gi be
the set of graphs with vertex set [n] for which S (i) is a minimal Gγ -deletion set. It is clear
that G has a Gγ -deletion set of size at most k if and only if G has a minimal Gγ -deletion
set of size at most k, so our goal is to compute | ri=1 Gi |. By the inclusion-exculsion
                                                      S

principle, we have
                                r
                                [             X                     \
                                      Gi =              (−1)|J|+1         Gi .
                                i=1          ∅̸=J⊆[r]               i∈J

In fact, we only need to consider sets J of size at most g(k) since no graph can have more
than g(k) minimal Gγ -deletion sets:
                                r
                                [             X                     \
                                      Gi =              (−1)|J|+1         Gi .
                                i=1          ∅̸=J⊆[r]               i∈J
                                             |J|≤g(k)


    As written, the number of terms in this sum is not FPT. However, we can compute
this sum more efficiently by observing that we only need to consider certain collections
of sets S (i) that contain relatively small vertex labels. Let J be a nonempty subset of
[r]. We say J is compacted if i∈J S (i) = [ℓ], where ℓ = | i∈J S (i) |. For example, if
                                  S                            S

S (1) = {1, 3, 5}, S (2) = {4, 5}, and S (3) = {2, 3, 4}, then J1 = {1, 3} is compacted, but
                                                                              T
J2 = {1, 2} is not. We will show that it is sufficient to just compute | i∈J Gi for the
sets J that are compacted.
   Suppose J ′ is a nonempty subset of [r]. Let ℓ = | i∈J ′ S (i) |, and let ϕ stand for the
                                                                S

function ϕ( i∈J ′ S (i) , [ℓ]). For each i ∈ J ′ , let Ŝ (i) = {ϕ(v) : v ∈ S (i) }. Let J be the set
           S

of indices such that {Ŝ (i) : i ∈ J ′ } = {S (i) : i ∈ J}. The set J is called the intersection
pattern of J ′ . The purpose of this is to relabel the elements in the collection of sets
{S (i) : i ∈ J ′ } so that the labels are as small as possible. Note that every intersection
pattern J is compacted.


                                                   173
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                                       Chapter 4


Lemma 73 Let J ′ be a nonempty subset of [r], and let J be the intersection pattern of
J ′ . We have
                                                   \               \
                                                           Gi =          Gi .
                                                   i∈J ′           i∈J


     Proof: Let G ′ =                                                                     (i)
                              T                    T                            S
                                  i∈J ′ Gi , G =       i∈J Gi , and ℓ = |       i∈J ′ S         |. Let ϕ1 be the function
ϕ( i∈J ′ S (i) , [ℓ]), and let ϕ2 be the function ϕ([n] \ i∈J ′ S (i) , [n] \ [ℓ]). Let ψ : G ′ → G be
  S                                                      S

the bijection defined as follows: for each G ∈ G, ψ(G) is the graph obtained by applying
ϕ1 to the labels in i∈J ′ S (i) and applying ϕ2 to the remaining labels. The map ψ is
                     S

indeed a bijection since ϕ1 and ϕ2 are both bijections, so |G ′ | = |G|.

                                                                                                        (i)
                                                                                           S
Lemma 74 Suppose ∅ ̸= J ⊆ [r] is compacted, and let ℓ = |                                       i∈J S         |. The number of
subsets J ′ ⊆ [r] with intersection pattern J is equal to nℓ .
                                                            


     Proof: Let J be the family of subsets J ′ ⊆ [r] that have intersection pattern J, and
let S be the family of all subsets of [n] of size exactly ℓ. Let ψ : J → S be defined by
ψ(J ′ ) = i∈J ′ S (i) for all J ′ ∈ J . The inverse of ψ can be defined as follows. Let A ∈ S,
         S

and let ϕ′ be the function ϕ([ℓ], A). For each i ∈ J, let Ŝ (i) = {ϕ′ (v) : v ∈ S (i) }. Let J ′ be
the set of indices such that {Ŝ (i) : i ∈ J} = {S (i) : i ∈ J ′ }. We define ψ −1 (A) = J ′ . This
function is indeed the inverse of ψ since J is the intersection pattern of J ′ . Therefore, ψ
is a bijection, so |J | = |S| = nℓ .
                                  

    Let C be the family of nonempty subsets J ⊆ [r] such that J is compacted and
|J| ≤ g(k). If J is the intersection pattern of J ′ , then |J| = |J ′ |. Therefore, by Lemmas 73
and 74, we have
                                      r
                                      [        Xn             \
                                          Gi =        (−1)|J|+1     Gi ,                                                 (4.1)
                                      i=1      J∈C
                                                   ℓJ           i∈J
                            (i)
                S
where ℓJ = |        |. The number of terms that we need to compute in the sum over J
                    i∈J S

is now roughly bounded above by (k · g(k))k·g(k) since there are at most |J|
                                                                             
                                                                          k
                                                                               possibilities


                                                             174
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                          Chapter 4


for a set S (i) of size k, and since |J| ≤ g(k). (See Section 4.3.2 for a more precise bound
on |C|.)
                               T
   To compute each term |        i∈J Gi |, we just need to design an algorithm for the following

problem: Given subsets S1 , . . . , Sp of [n], compute the number of graphs G with vertex
set [n] such that Si is a minimal Gγ -deletion set of G for all i ∈ [p]. Requiring that Si is
a minimal Gγ -deletion set of G is equivalent to requiring that Si is a Gγ -deletion set of G
and none of the sets X1 , . . . , Xq are a Gγ -deletion set of G, where X1 , . . . , Xq are all of
the sets that can be formed by removing one element from Si . Therefore, it is sufficient
to have an algorithm for the following problem: Given subsets S1 , . . . , Sp and X1 , . . . , Xq
of [n], compute the number of graphs G with vertex set [n] such that Si is a Gγ -deletion
set of G for all i ∈ [p], and Xi is not a Gγ -deletion set of G for all i ∈ [q].
   Suppose we have been given subsets S1 , . . . , Sp and X1 , . . . , Xq of [n]. For i ∈ [q], let
Hi be the set of graphs G with vertex set [n] such that Sj is a Gγ -deletion set of G for
all j ∈ [p], and Xi is a Gγ -deletion set of G. Also for i ∈ [q], let Hi be the set of graphs
G with vertex set [n] such that Sj is a Gγ -deletion set of G for all j ∈ [p], and Xi is not a
Gγ -deletion set of G. By the intersection version of the inclusion-exclusion principle, we
have
                                   q
                                   \            X                 \
                                         Hi =           (−1)|J|         Hi .                (4.2)
                                   i=1          J⊆[q]             i∈J
       T
Here       i∈∅ Hi denotes the set of graphs with vertex set [n] such that Sj is a Gγ -deletion

set of G for all j ∈ [p]. Therefore, it is sufficient to have an algorithm for the following
problem, without the sets Xi : Given subsets S1 , . . . , Sp of [n] of size at most k, compute
the number of graphs G with vertex set [n] such that Si is a Gγ -deletion set of G for
all i ∈ [p]. This is precisely the algorithm that is given in the hypothesis of Theorem 9.
Indeed, for each set Si in one of the original collections of minimal Gγ -deletion sets
(containing at most g(k) sets), there are at most k sets that can be formed by removing

                                                   175
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                    Chapter 4


one element from Si . Hence we have p ≤ (k + 1)g(k). This completes the algorithm for
Theorem 9. See Section 4.3.2 for the running time analysis.
   We can also prove a similar theorem for counting yes-instances of Feedback Vertex
Set in Tournaments.

Definition 9 For a tournament G, we say S ⊆ V (G) is a GA -deletion set of G if
G \ S ∈ GA . We say a GA -deletion set S of G is minimal if no proper subset of S is a
Gγ -deletion set of G.

   Every tournament has at most 3k minimal GA -deletion sets of size at most k, since a
tournament contains a directed cycle if and only if it contains a triangle (i.e., a directed
cycle of length 3). Let g(k) be this bound, i.e., g(k) = 3k for all k ≥ 0.

Theorem 10 Let n ∈ N, 0 ≤ k ≤ n, and let S1 , . . . , Sp be subsets of [n] of size at most
k, where 1 ≤ p ≤ (k + 1)g(k). Suppose we have an algorithm that, given n and the
sets S1 , . . . , Sp as input, computes the number of tournaments G with vertex set [n] such
that G \ Si ∈ GA for all i ∈ [p]. Suppose the running time of this algorithm is f (k)q(n).
Then there is an algorithm that given n ∈ N and 0 ≤ k ≤ n, computes the number of
tournaments G with vertex set [n] such that G \ S ∈ GA for some S ⊆ V (G) of size at
most k. The running time of this algorithm is g(k)O(k·g(k)) f (k)q(n).

   The algorithm for Theorem 10 is exactly the same as the algorithm for Theorem 9,
except every time we had a “graph,” we now have a “tournament,” and every time we
had a “Gγ -deletion set,” we now have a “GA -deletion set.” All that remains is to analyze
the running time.


4.3.2     Running time

   At the start of the algorithm for Theorem 9, we first compute all of the necessary
binomial coefficients that appear in the sum from Equation (4.1). We can compute all
                                            176
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                        Chapter 4

            a
            
values of   b
                such that 0 ≤ a ≤ n and 0 ≤ b ≤ a in O(n2 ) time.
   The algorithm begins with Equation (4.1), where we iterate over all J ∈ C. This
amounts to iterating over all collections {S1 , . . . , Sp } of subsets of [n] of size at most k
such that 1 ≤ p ≤ g(k) and pi=1 Si = [ℓ], where ℓ = | pi=1 Si |. The largest possible
                              S                                  S

value of ℓ is ℓmax := k · g(k). Therefore, to achieve this, we can first iterate over all
ordered collections S1 , . . . , Sp of subsets of [n] of size at most k such that 1 ≤ p ≤
g(k) and Si ⊆ [ℓmax ] for all i ∈ [p]. The number of such ordered collections is at
                       g(k)
most g(k) (k + 1)ℓkmax       ≤ g(k)O(k·g(k)) since k ≤ g(k). For each ordered collection
S1 , . . . , Sp , we check whether the sets are listed in lexicographic order, and we check
whether pi=1 Si = [ℓ], where ℓ = | pi=1 Si |. If so, we compute the corresponding term of
              S                       S

Equation (4.1), and if not, we discard this collection of sets. The reason we require the
sets to be in lexicographic order is to ensure that the same collection is not counted twice,
since we actually want to iterate over all unordered collections of sets. Therefore, we can
compute the right side of Equation (4.1) in time g(k)O(k·g(k)) · T (n, k), where T (n, k) is
                                                              T
an upper bound on the time it takes to compute each term | i∈J Gi |.
   Now T (n, k) is the time it takes to solve the following problem: Given subsets
S1 , . . . , Sp and X1 , . . . , Xq of [n], compute the number of graphs G with vertex set [n]
such that Si is a Gγ -deletion set of G for all i ∈ [p], and Xi is not a Gγ -deletion set of G
for all i ∈ [q]. Here we can assume 1 ≤ p ≤ g(k) and q ≤ k · g(k). We solve this problem
using Equation (4.2), which has at most 2k·g(k) terms since each J is a subset of [q]. To
                     T
compute each term | i∈J Hi |, we use the algorithm from the hypothesis of Theorem 9,
whose running time is f (k) · n2 log2 n. Hence we have T (n, k) = 2k·g(k) f (k) · n2 log2 n.
Therefore, the overall running time is g(k)O(k·g(k)) f (k)·n2 log2 n. The proof of the running
time in Theorem 10 is exactly the same.




                                              177
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                     Chapter 4


4.3.3     The algorithm for GI

   To complete the algorithm for the graph class GI , we need to design an algorithm for
the problem in which the sets S1 , . . . , Sp are given in the input. The following lemma
gives us a convenient way of characterizing graphs that have a given collection of vertex
covers.


Lemma 75 Let n ∈ N, and let S1 , . . . , Sp be subsets of [n], where p ≥ 1. Let A = pi=1 Si ,
                                                                                   S

B = [n] \ A, and T = pi=1 Si . Suppose G is a graph with vertex set [n]. Then Si is a
                    T

vertex cover of G for all i ∈ [p] if and only if G has the following properties:

  1. Si is a vertex cover of G[A] for all i ∈ [p]

  2. B is an independent set

  3. G has no edges with one endpoint in A \ T and the other in B.


    Proof: First, suppose Si is a vertex cover of G for all i ∈ [p]. Property (1) is clearly
true, and we know B is an independent set since S1 is a vertex cover of G. If u ∈ A \ T
and v ∈ B, then u and v are not adjacent since there is some set Si that does not contain
u. Thus property (3) holds as well.
   For the other direction, suppose properties (1)-(3) hold for G. Let i ∈ [p]. Every edge
in G[A] is incident to some vertex in Si by property (1). The only edges of G that do
not belong to G[A] are the edges from T to B, and all of these are incident to a vertex
in Si since T ⊆ Si . Hence Si is a vertex cover of G.
   To count how many graphs have all of the given vertex covers, we simply need to count
how many graphs satisfy properties (1)-(3). Let A, B, T be as defined in Lemma 75.


Lemma 76 Let n ∈ N, 0 ≤ k ≤ n, and let S1 , . . . , Sp be subsets of [n] of size at most k,
where 1 ≤ p ≤ (k + 1)2k . There is an algorithm that computes the number of graphs G
                                            178
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                      Chapter 4


with vertex set [n] such that Si is a vertex cover of G for all i ∈ [p]. The running time
                         4 2k
of this algorithm is 2O(k 2 ) · n2 log2 n.

     Proof: Algorithm. Let A be the set of graphs GA with vertex set A such that Si
is a vertex cover of GA for all i ∈ [p]. To compute |A|, we iterate over all graphs with
vertex set A, and for each such graph, we check whether every set Si is a vertex cover of
the graph. Let t = |T | and b = |B|. Return 2tb |A|.

   Correctness. This algorithm computes the number of graphs with vertex set [n]
that satisfy properties (1)-(3) from Lemma 75. The set A is the set of possibilities for
G[A], and for each fixed choice of G[A], there are 2tb possible ways of choosing the edges
from T to B. Thus the number of graphs that satisfy properties (1)-(3) is 2tb |A|.

   Running time. We have |A| ≤ (k 2 + k)2k , so the number of graphs with vertex set
                         4 2k                  2     k
A is at most 2h(k) ≤ 2O(k 2 ) , where h(k) = (k +k)2
                                                 2
                                                       . It is easy to check whether each
Si is a vertex cover of each graph with vertex set A in O(n2 ) time. Computing t and b
takes O(np) time, where p ≤ (k + 1)2k . Using repeated squaring, we can compute 2tb
in O(log n) multiplications, each of which takes n2 log n time since each number has at
                                                                          4 2k
most O(n2 ) bits [91]. Hence the running time of this algorithm is 2O(k 2 ) · n2 log2 n.
   By Theorem 9, this gives us an algorithm that computes the number of n-vertex
graphs with a vertex cover of size at most k. The overall running time is g(k)O(k·g(k)) f (k)·
                                               4 2k
n2 log2 n, where g(k) = 2k and f (k) = 2O(k 2 ) . This simplifies to a running time of
    4 2k
2O(k 2 ) · n2 log2 n.


4.3.4      The algorithm for GC

   Next, we follow similar steps to design an algorithm for GC , the class of cluster graphs.
Suppose G is a graph with vertex set V (G) ⊆ [n] for some n ∈ N, and suppose we have
been given a collection of subsets S1 , . . . , Sp of [n]. We say an edge (u, v) ∈ E(G) is
                                             179
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                      Chapter 4


perennial if {u, v} ∩ Si = ∅ for some i ∈ [p]. The intuition is that a perennial edge is
sometimes alive (not deleted) when we consider the graphs G \ S1 , . . . , G \ Sp . A non-edge
of G is a pair of distinct vertices u, v ∈ V (G) such that (u, v) ∈
                                                                  / E(G). We similarly say
a non-edge (u, v) of G is perennial if {u, v} ∩ Si = ∅ for some i ∈ [p].


Lemma 77 Let n ∈ N, and let S1 , . . . , Sp be subsets of [n], where p ≥ 1. Let A = pi=1 Si ,
                                                                                   S

B = [n] \ A, and T = pi=1 Si . Suppose G is a graph with vertex set [n]. Then G \ Si is
                    T

a cluster graph for all i ∈ [p] if and only if G has the following properties:

  1. G[A] \ Si is a cluster graph for all i ∈ [p]

  2. G[B] is a cluster graph

  3. For every v ∈ A \ T , N (v) ∩ B is either the empty set or is a connected component
      of G[B]

  4. For every u, v ∈ A \ T , if (u, v) is a perennial edge, then N (u) ∩ B = N (v) ∩ B

  5. For every u, v ∈ A \ T , if (u, v) is a perennial non-edge, then N (u) ∩ B ̸= N (v) ∩ B
      unless N (u) ∩ B = N (v) ∩ B = ∅.


    Proof: First, suppose G \ Si is a cluster graph for all i ∈ [p]. Property (1) is clearly
true, and we know G[B] is a cluster graph since G \ S1 is a cluster graph. For property
(3), let v ∈ A \ T . The vertex v belongs to some cluster graph G \ Sj since there is
some set Sj that does not contain v. If v were to have a neighbor w1 in one connected
component of G[B], along with a neighbor w2 in a distinct connected component of G[B],
then w1 , v, w2 would be an induced P3 in the graph G \ Sj , which is impossible. This
means N (v) ∩ B is contained in some component C of G[B]. Furthermore, if v were to
have a neighbor w1 ∈ C and an non-neighbor w2 ∈ C, then v, w1 , w2 would be an induced


                                             180
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                    Chapter 4


P3 in the graph G \ Sj , which is impossible. Therefore, we either have N (v) ∩ B = ∅ or
N (v) ∩ B = C.
   For property (4), let u, v ∈ A \ T , and suppose (u, v) is a perennial edge. This means
u and v both belong to some cluster graph G \ Sj . If N (u) ∩ B = N (v) ∩ B = ∅, then
we are done, so suppose without loss of generality that N (u) ∩ B is nonempty. Let
w ∈ N (u) ∩ B, and suppose for a contradiction that N (u) ∩ B ̸= N (v) ∩ B. By property
(3), the path w, u, v is an induced P3 in the graph G \ Sj , which is a contradiction. Hence
property (4) holds.
   For property (5), let u, v ∈ A \ T , and suppose (u, v) is a perennial non-edge. As
before, we know u and v both belong to some cluster graph G \ Sj . Suppose for a
contradiction that N (u) ∩ B = N (v) ∩ B and N (u) ∩ B ̸= ∅. This means there is some
vertex w ∈ N (u) ∩ B. The path u, w, v is an induced P3 in the graph G \ Sj , which is a
contradiction. Therefore, property (5) holds.
   For the other direction, suppose properties (1)-(5) hold for G. Let i ∈ [p], and let
u, v, w ∈ V (G) \ Si . If u, v, w ∈ A, then these vertices (in any order) cannot form an
induced P3 since G[A] \ Si is a cluster graph. If u, v, w ∈ B, then these vertices cannot
form an induced P3 by property (2). Now suppose one of these vertices, say w, is in
A and the other two are in B. If u and v are adjacent, then they belong to the same
connected component of G[B]. In this case, by property (3), w is adjacent to either both
of the vertices u and v or neither, so these do not form an induced P3 . If u and v are
not adjacent, then they belong to distinct connected components of G[B], so by property
(3), these vertices cannot form an induced P3 .
   The last remaining possibility is that one of the three vertices, say w, is in B and the
other two are in A. Since T ⊆ Si , we know u, v ∈ A \ T . If u and v are adjacent, then
(u, v) is a perennial edge, so by property (4), these vertices cannot form an induced P3 .
If u and v are not adjacent, then (u, v) is a perennial non-edge, so properties (3) and (5)
                                            181
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                        Chapter 4


imply that these vertices cannot form an induced P3 . Hence G \ Si is a cluster graph.
   Let A, B, T be as defined in Lemma 77.


Lemma 78 Let n ∈ N, 0 ≤ k ≤ n, and let S1 , . . . , Sp be subsets of [n] of size at most k,
where 1 ≤ p ≤ (k + 1)3k . There is an algorithm that computes the number of graphs G
with vertex set [n] such that G \ Si is a cluster graph for all i ∈ [p]. The running time of
                       4 2k
this algorithm is 2O(k 3 ) n2 log n.


    Proof: Algorithm. Let A be the set of graphs GA with vertex set A such that
GA \ Si is a cluster graph for all i ∈ [p]. If B = ∅, then our algorithm returns |A|.
Otherwise, we proceed as follows.
   Suppose GA ∈ A. Let GP be the subgraph of GA with vertex set A \ T that contains
all of the perennial edges of GA , and no other edges. Let C be the set of all connected
components of GP . Let Γ1 (GA ) be the family of all subsets E ⊆ C with the following
property: for every connected component C of GP , if there exists a perennial non-edge
of GA with both endpoints in C, then C ∈ E.
   Suppose E ∈ Γ1 (GA ), and suppose P is a true partition of C \ E. We say P satisfies
property (5) if the following holds: for every perennial non-edge (u, v) in GA , if u and v
belong to different components of GP , say Cu and Cv , then either Cu and Cv belong to
different parts in P, or at least one of Cu , Cv belongs to E. Let Γ2 (GA , E) be the family
of all true partitions of C \ E that satisfy property (5). Let b = |B| and t = |T |. Our
algorithm returns
                         X X           X            X
                                                            (b′ )|P| S(b, b′ )2tb .
                        GA ∈A b′ ∈[b] E∈Γ1 (GA ) P∈Γ2 (GA ,E)

Here |P| is the number of parts in the partition P, (b′ )|P| := b′ (b′ − 1) · · · (b′ − |P| + 1)
denotes the falling factorial, and S(b, b′ ) stands for the number of ways of partitioning a
set of size b into b′ nonempty parts (a Stirling number of the second kind).

                                                  182
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                    Chapter 4


   Correctness. We show that this algorithm computes the number of graphs with
vertex set [n] that satisfy properties (1)-(5) from Lemma 77. The graph GA corresponds
to G[A], and b′ corresponds to the number of connected components in G[B]. By property
(4) of Lemma 77, vertices in the same component of GP must have the same neighborhood
in B. The set E corresponds to the set of components of GP whose neighborhood in B
is the empty set, and the partition P groups together components of GP that have the
same (nonempty) neighborhood in B. It is correct to only consider subsets E ⊆ C that
belong to Γ1 (GA ) because of properties (4) and (5) of Lemma 77. Similarly, we only
consider partitions P that belong to Γ2 (GA , E) because of property (5) of that lemma.
   The term (b′ )|P| counts the number of injective functions from the set of parts in P
to the set of connected components of G[B], which corresponds to choosing the neigh-
borhood of the components of GP that make up each part. The Stirling number S(b, b′ )
is equal to the number of ways of partitioning B into b′ nonempty cliques. Finally, there
are 2tb possibilities for the edges between A \ T and B.

   Running time. At the start of this algorithm, we first compute all of the necessary
Stirling numbers, which can be done in O(n2 ) time using the standard recurrences. We
have |A| ≤ (k 2 + k)3k , so the number of graphs with vertex set A is at most 2h(k) ≤
    4 2k                   2    k
2O(k 3 ) , where h(k) = (k +k)3
                             2
                                  . It is easy to check whether GA \ Si is a cluster graph
for each graph GA with vertex set A in O(n2 ) time. For the second summation, there are
                                                                             2    k
b ≤ n possible values of b′ . We also know |C| ≤ |A|, so there are at most 2(k +k)3 possible
                                3 k
values of E, and at most 3O(k 3 ) true partitions of C \ E. Each multiplication in the
summation over GA , b′ , E, P takes O(n2 log n) time since each number has at most O(n2 )
bits [91]. Computing t and b takes O(np) time, where p ≤ (k + 1)3k . Using repeated
squaring, we can compute 2tb in O(log n) multiplications, each of which takes O(n2 log n)
                                                         4 2k
time. Hence the running time of this algorithm is 2O(k 3 ) · n3 log n.


                                            183
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                             Chapter 4


    By Theorem 9, this gives us an algorithm that computes the number of yes-instances
                                                                             4 2k
of Cluster Vertex Deletion. The overall running time is 2O(k 3 ) · n3 log n.


4.3.5      The algorithm for GA

    Next, we design an algorithm for GA , the class of acyclic tournaments. For directed
graphs, perennial edges are defined in the same way as for undirected graphs. Suppose
G is a directed graph with vertex set V (G) ⊆ [n] for some n ∈ N, and suppose we have
been given a collection of subsets S1 , . . . , Sp of [n]. We say an edge (u, v) ∈ E(G) is
perennial if {u, v} ∩ Si = ∅ for some i ∈ [p].
    Every acyclic tournament has a unique topological ordering (see Section 4.2). If we
wish to add an additional vertex to an acyclic tournament G while still maintaining
the acyclic property, this vertex can either go between two consecutive vertices in the
topological ordering, or it can go before or after all other vertices of G. Let ≤ denote
the topological ordering of G, and suppose the vertices are ordered as follows: v1 ≤ v2 ≤
. . . ≤ vn , where n = |V (G)|. A gap λ in the topological ordering of G is either v1 , vn , or
a pair of consecutive vertices (vi , vi+1 ), where 1 ≤ i < n. If λ = v1 , we say the vertices
v1 , . . . , vn come after λ, and if λ = vn , we say the vertices v1 , . . . , vn come before λ. If
λ = (vi , vi+1 ), we say the vertices v1 , . . . , vi come before λ and the vertices vi+1 , . . . , vn
come after λ. When we say a gap in G, this is short for a gap in the topological ordering
of G.
   Suppose G is a tournament with vertex set [n] for some n ∈ N, and suppose we
have been given a collection of subsets S1 , . . . , Sp of [n], where p ≥ 1. Let A = pi=1 Si ,
                                                                                    S

B = [n] \ A, and T = pi=1 Si . For a vertex v ∈ A \ T , we say its neighborhood is
                         T

organized if there exists a gap λ in G[B] such that (u, v) ∈ E(G) for every u ∈ B that
comes before λ and (v, u) ∈ E(G) for every u ∈ B that comes after λ. Note that if such


                                                 184
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                         Chapter 4


a gap exists, it is unique. We refer to λ as the gap corresponding to v.
   Let ≤B denote the topological ordering of G[B], and suppose the vertices of B are
ordered as follows: u1 ≤B u2 ≤B . . . ≤B ub , where b = |B|. (In fact, these vertices are
distinct, so we also could have written u1 <B u2 , etc., but for simplicity, we just define
the relation ≤B ). Let B be the set of size b + 1 of all gaps in the topological ordering
of G[B]. The ordering of G[B] naturally leads to a total order on B, denoted by ⪯. We
have u1 ⪯ (u1 , u2 ) ⪯ (u2 , u3 ) ⪯ · · · ⪯ (ub−1 , ub ) ⪯ ub , where each of these elements is a
gap in G[B].
   Now suppose the neighborhood of v is organized for every v ∈ A \ T . For such a
graph G, let h : A \ T → B be the function defined by h(v) = λv for all v ∈ A \ T , where
λv is the gap corresponding to v. We call h the gap function of G. We say this function
is orderly if h(v) ⪯ h(w) for every perennial edge (v, w) in G[A].


Lemma 79 Let n ∈ N, and let S1 , . . . , Sp be subsets of [n], where p ≥ 1. Let A = pi=1 Si ,
                                                                                   S

B = [n] \ A, and T = pi=1 Si . Suppose G is a tournament with vertex set [n]. Then
                    T

G \ Si is acyclic for all i ∈ [p] if and only if G has the following properties:

  1. G[A] \ Si is acyclic for all i ∈ [p]

  2. G[B] is acyclic

  3. For every v ∈ A \ T , the neighborhood of v is organized

  4. The gap function h of G is orderly.


     Proof: First suppose G \ Si is acyclic for all i ∈ [p]. Property (1) is clearly true, and
we know G[B] is acyclic since G \ S1 is acyclic. For property (3), let v ∈ A \ T , which
means there is some j ∈ [r] such that v ∈
                                        / Sj . Let ≤B denote the topological ordering
of G[B], and suppose the elements of B are ordered as follows: u1 ≤B u2 ≤B . . . ≤B ub ,

                                              185
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                       Chapter 4


where b = |B|. If we have (v, u) ∈ E(G) for every u ∈ B, then let λ = u1 . Otherwise, let
u′ be the last vertex in the ordering u1 , . . . , ub such that (u′ , v) ∈ E(G). We claim that
(u, v) ∈ E(G) for all u ∈ B such that u ≤B u′ . Indeed, if there were a vertex u ̸= u′ in B
such that u ≤B u′ and (v, u) ∈ E(G), then v, u, u′ would be a cycle in G \ Sj . Therefore,
we have (u, v) ∈ E(G) for all u ∈ B such that u ≤B u′ , and we have (v, u) ∈ E(G) for all
u ̸= u′ in B such that u′ ≤B u. If u′ = ub , then let λ = u′ , and otherwise, let λ = (u′ , w),
where w is the vertex immediately after u′ in the ordering u1 , . . . , ub . This shows that
the neighborhood of v is organized, since λ is the gap corresponding to v.
   For property (4), suppose for a contradiction that h is not orderly. This means there
is some perennial edge (v, w) in G[A] such that h(v) ̸⪯ h(w), so we have h(w) ⪯ h(v)
and h(v) ̸= h(w). Hence there is some u ∈ B that comes after h(w) and comes before
h(v). We know v and w belong to some acyclic graph G \ Sj . Therefore, u, v, w is a cycle
in G \ Sj , which is a contradiction.
   For the other direction, suppose properties (1)-(4) hold for G. Let i ∈ [p]. We show
that G \ Si has a topological ordering. The graph G[A] \ Si has a topological ordering by
property (1) (denoted by ≤A ), and the graph G[B] has a topological ordering by property
(2) (denoted by ≤B ). Based on these, we can define the relation ≤ on V (G) \ Si in the
following way. Let v, w ∈ V (G) \ Si . If v, w ∈ A, then v ≤ w if v ≤A w, and w ≤ v if
w ≤A v. If v, w ∈ B, then v ≤ w if v ≤B w, and w ≤ v if w ≤B v. If v ∈ A and w ∈ B,
then v ≤ w if w comes after h(v), and w ≤ v if w comes before h(v).
   To see that the relation ≤ is a topological ordering, we first check that it is a total
order. Clearly, this relation is reflexive. We cannot have both v ≤ w and w ≤ v in the
case when v ∈ A and w ∈ B, so it is also antisymmetric. To see that it is transitive,
suppose u ≤ v and v ≤ w for some u, v, w ∈ V (G) \ Si . If u, v, w ∈ A or u, v, w ∈ B, then
clearly u ≤ w. If u ∈ A and v, w ∈ B, then we have u ≤ w since w comes after h(u). If
v ∈ A and u, w ∈ B, or if w ∈ A and u, v ∈ B, then we can similarly see that u ≤ w. If
                                             186
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                   Chapter 4


u ∈ B and v, w ∈ A, then we have u ≤ w since h(v) ⪯ h(w) by property (4). If v ∈ B
and u, w ∈ A, or if w ∈ B and u, v ∈ A, then we can similarly see that u ≤ w. Thus the
relation ≤ is transitive.
   Now we just need to check that v ≤ w for every edge (v, w) in the graph G \ Si .
Suppose (v, w) is an edge in G \ Si . If v, w ∈ A, then clearly v ≤ w since v ≤A w, and
similarly, we are done if v, w ∈ B. If v ∈ A and w ∈ B, then w comes after h(v) by
property (3), so we have v ≤ w. Lastly, if v ∈ B and w ∈ A, then v comes before h(w) by
property (3), so we again have v ≤ w. Therefore, the relation ≤ is a topological ordering,
and thus G \ Si is acyclic.
   Let A, B, T be as defined in Lemma 79.


Lemma 80 Let n ∈ N, 0 ≤ k ≤ n, and let S1 , . . . , Sp be subsets of [n] of size at most k,
where 1 ≤ p ≤ (k +1)3k . There is an algorithm that computes the number of tournaments
G with vertex set [n] such that G \ Si is acyclic for all i ∈ [p]. The running time of this
                 4 2k
algorithm is 2O(k 3 ) n2 log n.


    Proof: Algorithm. Let A be the set of tournaments GA with vertex set A such
that GA \ Si is acyclic for all i ∈ [p]. Suppose GA ∈ A. For a true partition P of A \ T ,
we say P is an ordered partition if we have a total order on P (i.e., an ordering of the
parts, denoted by ≤). For each v ∈ A \ T , let Pv denote the part in P that contains v.
We say an ordered partition P of A \ T is orderly if Pv ≤ Pw for every perennial edge
(v, w) in GA . Let Γ(GA ) be the family of all ordered partitions P of A \ T such that P
is orderly. Let b = |B| and t = |T |. Our algorithm returns

                                         X       X b + 1
                                  b! ·                     2tb ,
                                                     |P|
                                         GA ∈A P∈Γ(GA )


where |P| is the number of parts in P.


                                                  187
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                     Chapter 4


   Correctness. We show that this algorithm computes the number of tournaments
with vertex set [n] that satisfy properties (1)-(4) from Lemma 79. There are b! possibilities
for G[B] since G[B] is acyclic. Therefore, we simply need to prove the following: the
number of tournaments G with vertex set [n] such that G[B] = GB and G satisfies
properties (1)-(4) is equal to
                                  X      X b + 1 
                                                   2tb
                                             |P|
                                 GA ∈A P∈Γ(GA )

for each fixed acyclic tournament GB with vertex set B. Let GA ∈ A, and let GB be an
acyclic tournament with vertex set B. Let G be the set of tournaments G with vertex
set [n] such that G[A] = GA , G[B] = GB , and G satisfies properties (1)-(4). Since A is
the set of possibilities for G[A], it is sufficient to show that |G| = P∈Γ(GA ) b+1
                                                                      P              tb
                                                                                |P|
                                                                                     2 .
   From the gap function h of a tournament G ∈ G, we can obtain an ordered partition
of A \ T . Let P be the (true) partition of A \ T such that v, w ∈ A \ T belong to the
same part if and only if h(v) = h(w). Now let P be ordered as follows: for v, w ∈ A \ T ,
we have Pv ≤ Pw if and only if h(v) ⪯ h(w). When P is defined in this way, we say P is
the ordered partition specified by h.
   We only consider ordered partitions P that belong to Γ(GA ) to ensure that the graphs
we are counting satisfy property (4). Let P ∈ Γ(GA ), and let B be the set of all gaps in
the topological ordering of G[B]. The number of functions h : A \ T → B such that P is
the ordered partition specified by h is equal to b+1
                                                     
                                                 |P|
                                                       , since |B| = b + 1. In other words,
this is number of possible gap functions h for a graph G ∈ G such that P is the ordered
partition specified by h. Given such a function h, the number of graphs G ∈ G such that
h is the gap function of G is equal to 2tb , since h specifies the directions of all of the
edges between A \ T and B, and there are 2tb possibilities for the edges between T and
B. Therefore, the number of graphs G ∈ G such that P is the ordered partition specified
by the gap function of G is equal to b+1  2 . This implies |G| = P∈Γ(GA ) b+1
                                          tb                    P                tb
                                     |P|                                     |P|
                                                                                  2 , as
                                            188
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                           Chapter 4


desired.

   Running time. At the start of this algorithm, we first compute all of the necessary
binomial coefficients, which can be done in O(n2 ) time. We have |A| ≤ (k 2 + k)3k , so
                                                                              4 2k
the number of tournaments with vertex set A is at most 2h(k) ≤ 2O(k 3 ) , where h(k) =
 (k2 +k)3k
           
      2
            . It is easy to check whether GA \Si is acyclic for each tournament GA with vertex
                                                                                                3 k
set A in O(n2 ) time. For the second summation, there are at most |A||A| |A|! = 3O(k 3 )
ordered true partitions of A \ T . Each multiplication in the summation over GA , P takes
O(n2 log n) time since each number has at most O(n2 ) bits [91]. Computing t and b
takes O(np) time, where p ≤ (k + 1)3k . Using repeated squaring, we can compute 2tb in
O(log n) multiplications, each of which takes O(n2 log n) time. Hence the running time
                           4 2k
of this algorithm is 2O(k 3 ) · n2 log2 n.
   By Theorem 10, this gives us an algorithm that computes the number of yes-instances
                                                                                              4 2k
of Feedback Vertex Set in Tournaments. The overall running time is 2O(k 3 ) ·
n2 log2 n.


4.3.6        The algorithm for GS

Split graph properties

   If C is the always-clique set, I is the always-independent set, and Q is the questioning
set of a split graph G, then (C, I, Q) is called the split decomposition of G. More generally,
a decomposition of a graph G is a triple (A1 , A2 , A3 ) such that {A1 , A2 , A3 } is a partition of
V (G). The following lemma is a more compact version of the results proved in Chapter 2
(see Observation 6 and Lemmas 25 and 26).


Lemma 81 The split decomposition (C, I, Q) of a split graph G has the following prop-
erties:

                                                189
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                            Chapter 4


   1. C is a clique and I is an independent set

   2. Q is either a clique or an independent set

   3. Every vertex in Q is adjacent to every vertex in C and is non-adjacent to every
      vertex in I

   4. If Q is a clique, then every vertex in C has a neighbor in I

   5. If Q is an independent set, then every vertex in I has a non-neighbor in C.


    The converse is also true, as we can see in the following lemma, which is a compact
version of Lemmas 27 and 30 from Chapter 2.


Lemma 82 Suppose G is a graph, and suppose (C, I, Q) is a decomposition of G that
satisfies properties (1)-(5) from Lemma 81. Then G is a split graph, and furthermore,
(C, I, Q) is the split decomposition of G.


    We will also need two more properties of split decompositions.


Lemma 83 Let G be a split graph. If u, v ∈ V (G) are true or false twins, then they
belong to the same part in the split decomposition (C, I, Q) of G. In other words, we
have u, v ∈ C, u, v ∈ I, or u, v ∈ Q.


     Proof: Suppose u ∈ C ′ for some split partition (C ′ , I ′ ) of G. We claim that in this
case, there must also be a split partition (C ⋆ , I ⋆ ) of G such that v ∈ C ⋆ . If v ∈ C ′ , then we
are done. Otherwise, we have u ∈ C ′ and v ∈ I ′ , which means (C ′ \{u}∪{v}, I ′ \{v}∪{u})
is a split partition of G that places v in the clique. Similarly, we can see that if u belongs
to the independent set of some split partition of G, then the same is true for v. Therefore,
we have u, v ∈ C, u, v ∈ I, or u, v ∈ Q.

                                                190
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                            Chapter 4


Lemma 84 Suppose G is a split graph with an induced subgraph Ĝ. Let (C, I, Q) be
the split decomposition of G, and let (Ĉ, ˆ
                                           I, Q̂) be the split decomposition of Ĝ. We have
Ĉ ⊆ C and Iˆ ⊆ I.


     Proof: To see that Ĉ ⊆ C, suppose v ∈ V (G) \ C. This means there is some split
partition (C ′ , I ′ ) of G such that v ∈ I ′ . Let C ⋆ = C ′ ∩ V (Ĝ) and I ⋆ = I ′ ∩ V (Ĝ). If
v ∈ V (Ĝ), then the pair (C ⋆ , I ⋆ ) is a split partition of Ĝ with the property that v ∈ I ⋆ , so
v∈
 / Ĉ. Otherwise, if v ∈
                       / V (Ĝ), then clearly v ∈
                                                / Ĉ. Hence Ĉ ⊆ C. A similar argument
(reversing the roles of the always-clique set and the always-independent set) shows that
Iˆ ⊆ I.


Guess lists

    The goal of this section (Section 4.3.6) is to prove the following lemma.


Lemma 85 Let n ∈ N, 0 ≤ k ≤ n, and let S1 , . . . , Sp be subsets of [n] of size at most k,
where 1 ≤ p ≤ (k + 1)5k . There is an algorithm that computes the number of graphs G
with vertex set [n] such that G \ Si is a split graph for all i ∈ [p]. The running time of
                     O(k2 5k )
this algorithm is 42             · n7 log n.


    In this algorithm, we will guess certain information about these graphs in order to
group them into smaller families of graphs that are easier to count. Suppose we have
been given n ∈ N, as well as a collection of subsets S1 , . . . , Sp of [n], where p ≥ 1. Let
A = pi=1 Si , and let B = [n] \ A.
    S

    Suppose G is a graph with vertex set [n] such that G \ Si is a split graph for all
i ∈ [p]. Let (CB , IB , QB ) be the split decomposition of G[B], and let (Ci , Ii , Qi ) be the
split decomposition of G \ Si for each i ∈ [p]. For such a graph G, we define the sets
CByes , CBno , IByes , IBno in the following way. Let CByes be the set of vertices in CB that have

                                                191
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                             Chapter 4


a neighbor in IB , and let CBno be the set of vertices in CB that do not have a neighbor
in IB . Let IByes be the set of vertices in IB that have a non-neighbor in CB , and let IBno
be the set of vertices in IB that do not have a non-neighbor in CB . In Definition 10, the
identifiers C, I, and Q stand for the parts in the split decomposition of G \ Si , D stands
for “deleted,” and E stands for “empty set.”

Definition 10 A guess list is a tuple

                                                                   (1)          (p)   (1)            (p)
               (GA , cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z, fC , fI , fQ , gA , . . . , gA , gQ , . . . , gQ ),

where GA is a graph with vertex set A, the numbers cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q are nonnegative
integers such that cyes + cno + iyes + ino + q = |B|, z is a boolean, and the remaining entries
are functions of the following form:

   • fC , fI , fQ : 2A → {0, 1, 2}

        (i)
   • gA : A → {D, C, I, Q} for all i ∈ [p]

        (i)
   • gQ : 2A → {E, C, I, Q} for all i ∈ [p].

    The graph GA specifies the edges of G[A], the numbers cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q are the sizes
of CByes , CBno , IByes , IBno , QB , respectively, and z indicates whether or not QB is a clique. For
A′ ⊆ A, the values fC (A′ ), fI (A′ ), and fQ (A′ ) specify the number of vertices in certain
sets (namely CBno , IBno , and QB ) whose neighborhood in A is equal to A′ . Each of these
numbers is either 0, 1, or at least 2. When we say fC (A′ ) matches with a number ℓ, this
means ℓ = 0 if fC (A′ ) = 0, ℓ = 1 if fC (A′ ) = 1, and ℓ ≥ 2 if fC (A′ ) = 2. We also define
matches with in the same way for fI (A′ ) and fQ (A′ ).
                                                (i)         (i)
    For each i ∈ [p], the functions gA and gQ specify the roles certain vertices play in
                                                                                               (i)
the split decomposition of G \ Si . Let v ∈ A, i ∈ [p]. When we say gA (v) matches with
the part in the split decomposition of G \ Si that contains v, this means the following:
                                                         192
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                                      Chapter 4

       (i)                                    (i)                                    (i)
if gA (v) = D, then v ∈ Si ; if gA (v) = C, then v ∈ Ci ; if gA (v) = I, then v ∈ Ii ; and if
 (i)
gA (v) = Q, then v ∈ Qi .
       For A′ ⊆ A, the neighborhood class of A′ is the set N (A′ ) := {v ∈ QB : N (v)∩A = A′ }.
                                                    (i)
Let A′ ⊆ A, i ∈ [p]. When we say gQ (A′ ) matches with the part in the split decomposition
                                                                                       (i)
of G \ Si that contains N (A′ ), this means the following: if gQ (A′ ) = E, then N (A′ ) = ∅;
       (i)                                                (i)                                                 (i)
if gQ (A′ ) = C, then N (A′ ) ⊆ Ci ; if gQ (A′ ) = I, then N (A′ ) ⊆ Ii ; and if gQ (A′ ) = Q,
then N (A′ ) ⊆ Qi .


Definition 11 Suppose G is a graph with vertex set [n]. For a guess list

                                                                             (1)           (p)   (1)       (p)
                 L = (GA , cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z, fC , fI , fQ , q, gA , . . . , gA , gQ , . . . , gQ ),

we say G conforms to L if G \ Si is a split graph for all i ∈ [p] and the following holds:

       • G[A] = GA

       • |CByes | = cyes , |CBno | = cno , |IByes | = iyes , |IBno | = ino , |QB | = q

       • QB is a clique if and only if z = 1

       • For all A′ ⊆ A, fC (A′ ) matches with |{v ∈ CBno : N (v) ∩ A = A′ }|

       • For all A′ ⊆ A, fI (A′ ) matches with |{v ∈ IBno : N (v) ∩ A = A′ }|

       • For all A′ ⊆ A, fQ (A′ ) matches with |N (A′ )|

                                              (i)
       • For all i ∈ [p], v ∈ A, gA (v) matches with the part in the split decomposition of
             G \ Si that contains v

                                              (i)
       • For all i ∈ [p], A′ ⊆ A, gQ (A′ ) matches with the part in the split decomposition of
             G \ Si that contains N (A′ ).


                                                                193
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                     Chapter 4


    For each guess list L, our algorithm will count the number of graphs that conform
                                                                             (1)    (p)   (1)        (p)
to L. Suppose L = (GA , cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z, fC , fI , fQ , gA , . . . , gA , gQ , . . . , gQ ) is a
guess list. For this guess list to make sense, we need its entries to be consistent with one
another. In particular, q and z are both related to whether QB is a clique, the functions
           (i)
fQ and gQ both have the ability to specify whether each neighborhood class N (A′ ) is
                                         (i)
empty or not, and the functions gQ need to agree with which vertices are actually deleted.
We say L is consistent if the following conditions hold:

    • If q ≤ 1, then z = 1

                                                                       (i)
    • For all A′ ⊆ A, fQ (A′ ) = 0 if and only if we have gQ (A′ ) = E for all i ∈ [p]

                                               (i)
    • For all v ∈ A, i ∈ [p], we have gA (v) = D if and only if v ∈ Si .

    For every graph G counted by our algorithm, the split graph G \ Si needs to satisfy
properties (1)-(5) of Lemma 81 for each i ∈ [p]. Recall that the split decomposition of
G \ Si is denoted by (Ci , Ii , Qi ) for each i ∈ [p]. To begin with, we need a way of checking
whether Qi is a clique or independent set (or both). Let i ∈ [p]. We say L is of clique
type for i if the following holds:

                    (i)
    • {v ∈ A : gA (v) = Q} is a clique in GA

    • If         fQ (A′ ) ≥ 2, then z = 1
             P
             (i)
        A′ :gQ (A′ )=Q

                               (i)                               (i)
    • For all A′ ⊆ A, if gQ (A′ ) = Q, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = Q} ⊆ A′ .

We say L is of independent type for i if the following holds:

                    (i)
    • {v ∈ A : gA (v) = Q} is an independent set in GA

    • If         fQ (A′ ) ≥ 2, then z = 0
             P
             (i)
        A′ :gQ (A′ )=Q

                                                     194
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                         Chapter 4

                            (i)                          (i)
   • For all A′ ⊆ A, if gQ (A′ ) = Q, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = Q} ⊆ A \ A′ .

The intuition is that L is of clique type for i if Qi is a clique, and L is of independent
type for i if Qi is an independent set. In the penultimate bullet point, checking whether
z = 0 is equivalent to checking whether QB is an independent set, since here we have
|QB | ≥ 2.
   In the following table, we assume i ∈ [p] is fixed. We list some necessary conditions
for G \ Si to be a split graph, grouped according to the five properties from Lemma 81.
The phrases in italics are intuition, and the bullet points are requirements for L. We say
the guess list L is locally valid if it satisfies all of the bullet points in the following table
for every i ∈ [p].


 1. Ci is a clique and Ii is an independent set
 Ci ∩ A is a clique and Ii ∩ A is an independent set
                     (i)
     • {v ∈ A : gA (v) = C} is a clique in GA
                     (i)
     • {v ∈ A : gA (v) = I} is an independent set in GA

 Ci ∩ QB is a clique is a clique and Ii ∩ QB is an independent set

     • If          fQ (A′ ) ≥ 2, then z = 1
              P
              (i)
         A′ :gQ (A′ )=C


     • If          fQ (A′ ) ≥ 2, then z = 0
              P
             (i)
         A′ :gQ (A′ )=I


 All edges between Ci ∩ A and CBno are present, and we only have non-edges between
 Ii ∩ A and IBno

                                                          (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if fC (A′ ) > 0, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = C} ⊆ A′
                                                          (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if fI (A′ ) > 0, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = I} ⊆ A \ A′




                                              195
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                 Chapter 4



 All edges between Ci ∩A and Ci ∩QB are present, and we only have non-edges between
 Ii ∩ A and Ii ∩ QB

                           (i)                          (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if gQ (A′ ) = C, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = C} ⊆ A′
                           (i)                          (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if gQ (A′ ) = I, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = I} ⊆ A \ A′

 2. Qi is either a clique or an independent set


     • L is of clique type or independent type for i

 3. Every vertex in Qi is adjacent to every vertex in Ci and is non-adjacent to every
 vertex in Ii
 Every vertex in Qi ∩ A is adjacent to every vertex in Ci ∩ A and is non-adjacent to
 every vertex in Ii ∩ A

                                             (i)
     • In GA , every vertex in {v ∈ A : gA (v) = Q} is adjacent to every vertex in
                 (i)                                                         (i)
       {v ∈ A : gA (v) = C} and is non-adjacent to every vertex in {v ∈ A : gA (v) = I}

 The same property holds for edges between Qi ∩ A and CBno ∪ IBno

                                                       (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if fC (A′ ) > 0, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = Q} ⊆ A′
                                                       (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if fI (A′ ) > 0, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = Q} ⊆ A \ A′

 The same property holds for edges between A and QB

                           (i)                          (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if gQ (A′ ) = Q, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = C} ⊆ A′
                           (i)                          (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if gQ (A′ ) = C, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = Q} ⊆ A′
                           (i)                          (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if gQ (A′ ) = Q, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = I} ⊆ A \ A′
                           (i)                          (i)
     • For all A′ ⊆ A, if gQ (A′ ) = I, then {v ∈ A : gA (v) = Q} ⊆ A \ A′

 If Qi ∩ QB and Ci ∩ QB (resp. Ii ∩ QB ) are nonempty, then QB is a clique (resp. an
 independent set)

                                            196
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                     Chapter 4



           (i)               (i)
     • If gQ (A′ ) = Q and gQ ( e
                               A) = C for some A′ , A
                                                    e ⊆ A, then z = 1

           (i)              (i) e
     • If gQ (A′ ) = Q and gQ (A) = I for some A′ , A
                                                    e ⊆ A, then z = 0

 4. If Qi is a clique, then every vertex in Ci has a neighbor in Ii
 If Qi is a clique, then every vertex in CBno has a neighbor in Ii , which can come from
 A or QB

     • If L is of clique type for i, then at least one of the following holds:
                            (i)
          – A′ ∩ {v ∈ A : gA (v) = I} ̸= ∅ for every A′ ⊆ A such that fC (A′ ) > 0
                 (i)
          – gQ (A′ ) = I for some A′ ⊆ A


 If Qi is a clique, then every vertex in Ci ∩ QB has a neighbor in Ii , which can come
 from A or QB

                                                                      (i)
     • If L is of clique type for i, then for every A′ ⊆ A such that gQ (A′ ) = C, at least
       one of the following holds:
                 (i)
          – gA (v) = I for some v ∈ A′
                       (i) e              e⊆A
          – z = 1 and gQ (A) = I for some A


 5. If Qi is an independent set, then every vertex in Ii has a non-neighbor in Ci .
 If Qi is an independent set, then every vertex in IBno has a non-neighbor in Ci , which
 can come from A or QB

     • If L is of independent type for i, then at least one of the following holds:
                                   (i)
          – (A \ A′ ) ∩ {v ∈ A : gA (v) = C} ̸= ∅ for every A′ ⊆ A such that fI (A′ ) > 0
                 (i)
          – gQ (A′ ) = C for some A′ ⊆ A


 If Qi is an independent set, then every vertex in Ii ∩ QB has a non-neighbor in Ci ,
 which can come from A or QB




                                            197
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                           Chapter 4



                                                                                  (i)
     • If L is of independent type for i, then for every A′ ⊆ A such that gQ (A′ ) = I,
       at least one of the following holds:
                  (i)
               – gA (v) = C for some v ∈ A \ A′
                            (i)                e⊆A
               – z = 0 and gQ ( e
                               A) = C for some A




   If Qi is a clique, then we also need to make sure every vertex in Ci ∩ A has a neighbor
in Ii . Similarly, if Qi is an independent set, then we need to make sure every vertex in
Ii ∩ A has a non-neighbor in Ci . The edges between Ci ∩ A and Ii (resp. Ii ∩ A and Ci ) are
not completely specified by L since we do not guess information about the neighborhoods
of vertices in IByes (resp. CByes ). However, we can obtain two more necessary conditions
for L.
                                                              (i)
   Fix i ∈ [p]. We say a vertex v ∈ A such that gA (v) = C is satisfied for i if at least
one of the following holds:

                                                  (i)
   • In GA , v has a neighbor in {u ∈ A : gA (u) = I}

                                                                    (i)
   • v ∈ A′ for some A′ ⊆ A such that fI (A′ ) > 0 or gQ (A′ ) = I.

In other words, v is satisfied if it has a neighbor in Ii that comes from A, IBno , or QB (in
                                                                                   (i)
the graphs that conform to L). Similarly, we say a vertex v ∈ A such that gA (v) = I is
satisfied for i if at least one of the following holds:

                                                        (i)
   • In GA , v has a non-neighbor in {u ∈ A : gA (u) = C}

                                                                    (i)
   • v∈
      / A′ for some A′ ⊆ A such that fC (A′ ) > 0 or gQ (A′ ) = I.
                 Tp                                                                    (i)
   Let T =        i=1 Si . A vertex v ∈ A\T is a universally clique vertex if we have gA (v) = C

or v ∈ Si for all i ∈ [p]. A vertex v ∈ A \ T is a universally independent vertex if we
         (i)
have gA (v) = I or v ∈ Si for all i ∈ [p]. For a vertex v ∈ A \ T , if there is some i ∈ [p]
                                               198
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                        Chapter 4

                                       (i)
such that L is of clique type for i, gA (v) = C, and v is not satisfied for i, then we say v
is neighbor needy. Similarly, if there is some i ∈ [p] such that L is of independent type
        (i)
for i, gA (v) = I, and v is not satisfied for i, then we say v is non-neighbor needy. We
say L is globally valid if the following holds:

    • For all v ∈ A \ T , if v is neighbor needy, then v is a universally clique vertex

    • For all v ∈ A \ T , if v is non-neighbor needy, then v is a universally independent
      vertex.

    Putting this all together, we say the guess list L is valid if it is consistent, locally
valid, and globally valid.


The algorithm

    As part of our algorithm, we will need to compute the number of ordered partitions
of CBno , IBno , and QB that are consistent with our guesses for the sizes of the parts. For
a nonnegative integer j and an ordered list A1 , . . . , Ar of subsets of {0, 1, . . . , n}, let
pB (j, F) denote the number of ordered partitions of [j] into r parts P1 , . . . , Pr such that
|Pi | ∈ Ai for all i ∈ [r].
    We will also need to compute the number of possibilities for G[B]. For a split graph G
with split decomposition (C, I, Q), let Cyes be the set of vertices in C that have a neighbor
in I, and let Cno be the set of vertices in C that do not have a neighbor in I. Let Iyes be
the set of vertices in I that have a non-neighbor in C, and let Ino be the set of vertices in
I that do not have a non-neighbor in C. For nonnegative integers cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q and




                                              199
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                              Chapter 4


a boolean z, let sB (cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z) denote the number of split graphs G such that

                 Cyes = [cyes ],

                  Cno = [cyes + 1, cyes + cno ],

                  Iyes = [cyes + cno + 1, cyes + cno + iyes ],

                   Ino = [cyes + cno + iyes + 1, cyes + cno + iyes + ino ],

                    Q = [cyes + cno + iyes + ino + 1, cyes + cno + iyes + ino + q],

and such that Q is a clique if and only if z = 1.
    For now, we assume we have algorithms that compute sB (cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z) and
pB (j, F). See the following two sections for the details of these algorithms. Suppose we
have been given a fixed valid guess list

                                                                      (1)         (p)    (1)         (p)
            L = (GA , cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z, fC , fI , fQ , gA , . . . , gA , gQ , . . . , gQ ).

Let ĉ be the number of vertices in A \ T that are neighbor needy, and let č be the number
of universally clique vertices in A \ T that are not neighbor needy. Let î be the number
of vertices in A \ T that are non-neighbor needy, and let ǐ be the number of universally
independent vertices in A \ T that are not non-neighbor needy.
    We define the set families FC , FI , and FQ in the following way. Let A′1 , . . . , A′r be all
of the subsets of A, where r = 2|A| . For i ∈ [r], let AC               ′             C
                                                        i = {0} if fC (Ai ) = 0, let Ai = {1}

if fC (A′i ) = 1, and let AC                                ′                        I
                           i = {2, 3, . . . , cno } if fC (Ai ) = 2. Similarly, let Ai = {0} if

fI (A′i ) = 0, let AIi = {1} if fI (A′i ) = 1, and let AIi = {2, 3, . . . , ino } if fI (A′i ) = 2. Let
AQ               ′             Q               ′                 Q
 i = {0} if fQ (Ai ) = 0, let Ai = {1} if fQ (Ai ) = 1, and let Ai = {2, 3, . . . , q} if
                                                                                    Q
fQ (A′i ) = 2. Now let FC = {AC            C           I            I                            Q
                              1 , . . . , Ar }, FI = {A1 , . . . , Ar }, and FQ = {A1 , . . . , Ar }.

    Let L be the set of all valid guess lists. Let b = |B| and t = |T |. Our algorithm
returns
              X                   b
                                                  
                                                   (2cyes − 1)î (2iyes − 1)ĉ 2cyes ǐ+iyes č+tb h(L),
              L∈L
                      cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q
                                                        200
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                         Chapter 4


where
               h(L) = sB (cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z) pB (cno , FC ) pB (ino , FI ) pB (q, FQ ),
                                                       
                                         b                                 b!
                                                          =                                ,
                            cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q       cyes ! cno ! iyes ! ino ! q!
and cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z are entries of L.


Counting ordered partitions

    For a nonnegative integer j and an ordered list A1 , . . . , Ar of subsets of {0, 1, . . . , n},
we defined pB (j, F) as the number of ordered partitions of [j] into r parts P1 , . . . , Pr such
that |Pi | ∈ Ai for all i ∈ [r]. We now describe how to compute this function.
    Suppose we have been given j and A1 , . . . , Ar . For 0 ≤ s ≤ j, 1 ≤ t ≤ r, let p(s, t)
be the number of ordered partitions of [s] into t parts P1 , . . . , Pt such that |Pi | ∈ Ai for
all i ∈ [t]. It is easy to verify that this satisfies the recurrence

                                              X s
                                    p(s, t) =       p(s − a, t − 1).
                                              a∈A
                                                  a
                                                    t
                                                a≤s


For the base case, we have p(s, 0) = 1 for all 0 ≤ s ≤ j. In the end, we compute
pB (j, F) = p(j, r) using dynamic programming.


Counting split graphs

    Next, we describe how to compute sB (cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z), which corresponds to the
number of possibilities for G[B]. Suppose we have been given cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, and z.
If z = 1, then we return 0 if cno > 0. If q ≤ 1 or z = 0 (i.e., if QB is an independent set),
then we return 0 if ino > 0. Otherwise, we proceed as follows.
    We just need to compute the number of possibilities for the edges between Cyes and
Iyes , since there is only one possibility for all other edges. For v ∈ [cyes ], let Gv be the set
                                                  e := [cyes ] is a clique, Ie := [cyes +1, cyes +iyes ]
of graphs with vertex set [cyes +iyes ] such that C
                                                        201
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                              Chapter 4


is an independent set, the vertex v ∈ C
                                      e has a neighbor in e    I, and every vertex in Ie has a
                                                                                 Tcyes
                C. Our goal is to compute sB (cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z) = | i=1
non-neighbor in e                                                                      Gv |. By the
intersection version of the inclusion-exclusion principle, we have
                             cyes      cyes              j
                             \         X      cyes      j
                                                          \
                                  Gv =              (−1)      Gv .
                             v=1       j=0
                                               j          v=1

If j > 0, then
                                         j
                                         \
                                              Gv = 2(cyes −j)iyes
                                        v=1

since there are cyes − j possible neighbors for each vertex in I.
                                                               e If j = 0, then
                                       j
                                       \
                                             Gv = (2cyes − 1)iyes
                                       v=1

since every vertex in Ie must have a non-neighbor in C.
                                                     e


Proof of correctness

    First, we show that every graph we wish to count conforms to a unique guess list.

Lemma 86 Suppose G is a graph with vertex set [n] such that G \ Si is a split graph for
all i ∈ [p]. Then there is a unique guess list L such that G conforms to L.

     Proof: Let GA = G[A], cyes = |CByes |, cno = |CBno |, iyes = |IByes |, ino = |IBno | and
q = |QB |. Let z = 1 if QB is a clique, and let z = 0 otherwise. For each A′ ⊆ A, we
define fC (A′ ), fI (A′ ), and fQ (A′ ) in the natural way. Let fˆC (A′ ) (resp. fˆI (A′ )) be the
number of vertices v ∈ CBno (resp. v ∈ IBno ) such that N (v) ∩ A = A′ . If fˆC (A′ ) ≤ 1, then
let fC (A′ ) = fˆC (A′ ), and otherwise, let fC (A′ ) = 2. Similarly, if fˆI (A′ ) ≤ 1, then let
fI (A′ ) = fˆI (A′ ), and otherwise, let fI (A′ ) = 2. If |N (A′ )| ≤ 1, then let fQ (A′ ) = |N (A′ )|,
and otherwise, let fQ (A′ ) = 2.
                                                             (i)      (i)
    Next, for each i ∈ [p], we define the functions gA and gQ in the following way. For
                    (i)                            (i)                          (i)
each v ∈ A, let gA (v) = D if v ∈ Si , let gA (v) = C if v ∈ Ci , let gA (v) = I if v ∈ Ii ,
                                                  202
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                                   Chapter 4

               (i)                                           (i)
and let gA (v) = Q otherwise. To define gQ , suppose A′ ⊆ A. If N (A′ ) = ∅, then let
 (i)
gQ (A′ ) = E. Now suppose N (A′ ) is nonempty. By Lemma 81, the vertices of N (A′ ) are
either all true twins or all false twins of one another in G. By Lemma 83, this implies that
the vertices of N (A′ ) all belong to the same part in the split decomposition of G \ Si .
         (i)                                                (i)                                           (i)
Let gQ (A′ ) be defined accordingly: let gQ (A′ ) = C if N (A′ ) ⊆ Ci , let gQ (A′ ) = I if
                               (i)
N (A′ ) ⊆ Ii , and let gQ (A′ ) = Q otherwise. Now let

                                                                          (1)         (p)   (1)         (p)
                 L = (GA , cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z, fC , fI , fQ , gA , . . . , gA , gQ , . . . , gQ ).

The values of each entry in L have been defined so that G conforms to L. Furthermore,
L is unique since the split decompositions of G[B] and each graph G \ Si are unique.
       In fact, every such graph conforms to a unique valid guess list.

Lemma 87 Suppose G is a graph with vertex set [n] such that G \ Si is a split graph for
all i ∈ [p]. If L is the guess list from Lemma 86 such that G conforms to L, then L is
valid.

        Proof: Clearly L is consistent. By the definition of clique type, we know L is of
clique type for i if and only if Qi is a clique, for each i ∈ [p]. Since G \ Si is a split
graph, this means G \ Si satisfies all five properties of Lemma 81 for all i ∈ [p], so L
is locally valid. To see that L is globally valid, suppose there is a vertex v ∈ A \ T
that is neighbor needy, i.e., there is some i ∈ [p] for which property (4) of Lemma 81
implies that v has a neighbor in IByes . If v ∈ Ii ∪ Qi for some i ∈ [p], then Lemma 81
implies that v is non-adjacent to every vertex in IByes , since IByes ⊆ Ii by Lemma 84. This
a contradiction, so v must be a universally clique vertex. Similarly, if there is a vertex
v ∈ A \ T that is non-neighbor needy, then v must be a universally independent vertex.
Hence L is globally valid, which means L is valid.
       Finally, we show that we compute the correct number of graphs for each valid guess
list.
                                                             203
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                             Chapter 4


Lemma 88 Suppose L is a valid guess list. The number of graphs G with vertex set [n]
that conform to L is
                                               
                                 b
                                                 (2cyes − 1)î (2iyes − 1)ĉ 2cyes ǐ+iyes č+tb h(L),
                    cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q

where
              h(L) = sB (cyes , cno , iyes , ino , q, z) pB (cno , FC ) pB (ino , FI ) pB (q, FQ ).

                                                                    b
                                                                                   
     Proof: The multinomial coefficient                  cyes ,cno ,iyes ,ino ,q
                                                                                       counts the number of ways of
assigning the labels in B to the sets CByes , CBno , IByes , IBno , and Q. Suppose CByes , CBno , IByes ,
IBno , and Q are fixed label sets with sizes cyes , cno , iyes , ino , and q, respectively. Also,
suppose P1 , P2 , and P3 are fixed ordered partitions chosen from the ones counted by
pB (cno , FC ), pB (ino , FI ), and pB (q, FQ ) respectively. Suppose G is a graph that conforms
to L, has those particular label sets, and is such that the set of vertices in the ith
neighborhood class of CBno (resp. IBno , Q) is equal to the ith part in the partition P1 (resp.
P2 , P3 ) for all i. All of the edges of G[A] are specified by GA , and all of the edges from A
to CBno ∪ CBno ∪ QB are specified by L. We know CB is a clique, IB is an independent set,
QB is a clique or independent set (depending on the value of z in L), and every vertex
in QB is adjacent to every vertex in CB and is non-adjacent to every vertex in IB .
    The only edges that have not already been determined by L are the edges between A
and CByes ∪ IByes and the edges between CB and IB . The function sB computes the number
of possibilities for the second of these, so now we just need to show that the number of
possibilities for the edges between A and CByes ∪ IByes is (2cyes − 1)î (2iyes − 1)ĉ 2cyes ǐ+iyes č+tb .
There are 2tb possibilities for the edges between T and B. For the edges between A \ T
and B, the only ones that have not already been determined are the edges from IByes to a
universally clique vertex in A \ T and the edges from CByes to a universally independent
vertex in A\T . Each universally clique vertex v ∈ A\T has 2iyes −1 possible neighborhoods
in IByes if v is neighbor needy and 2iyes possible neighborhoods otherwise. Similarly, each
                                                         204
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                            Chapter 4


universally independent vertex v ∈ A \ T has 2cyes − 1 possible neighborhoods in CByes if
v is non-neighbor needy and 2cyes possible neighborhoods otherwise. This yield a total of
(2cyes − 1)î (2iyes − 1)ĉ 2cyes ǐ+iyes č+tb possibilities.




Running time

    Each of the necessary multinomial coefficients can be computed in O(n) time. When
we sum over L ∈ L, the number of possible functions in the entries of L is dominated by
                                             (i)
the number of possibilities for gQ , which is

                                                       |A|      O(k2 5k )
                                                   42        = 42           .

                                                                            2                                   |A|
The number of possibilities for GA is at most 2|A| , which is much smaller than 42 .
There are O(n4 ) possibilities for the values of cyes , cno , iyes , ino , and q since cno and ino
cannot both be nonzero at once. Each multiplication in the summation over L takes
O(n2 log n) time since each number has at most O(n2 ) bits [91]. Computing t and b
takes O(np) time, where p ≤ (k + 1)5k . Using repeated squaring, we can compute 2tb in
O(log n) multiplications, each of which takes O(n2 log n) time. Hence the running time
                             O(k2 5k )
of this algorithm is 42                  · n7 log n.
    By Theorem 9, we obtain an algorithm that computes the number of yes-instances of
                                                                                O(k2 5k )
Split Vertex Deletion. The overall running time is 42                                       · n7 log n.



4.4        Faster Algorithm for Counting Graphs with a

           Small Vertex Cover

    In the previous section, we designed algorithms for counting yes-instances of four
vertex deletion problems, including Vertex Cover. However, the running time of
                                                              205
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                   Chapter 4


each of these algorithms was a double-exponential or triple-exponential function of k. In
                                                                                    4 2k
particular, the running time for counting graphs with a small vertex cover was 2O(k 2 ) ·
n2 log2 n. In this section, we show that using ideas inspired by the Buss kernel for this
problem, we can design a much faster algorithm for counting yes-instances of Vertex
Cover.


Theorem 11 There is an algorithm that given n ∈ N and 0 ≤ k ≤ n, computes the
number of labeled graphs with vertex set [n] that have a vertex cover of size at most k.
                         2
This algorithm uses k O(k ) n3 arithmetic operations.


   To design this algorithm, we first observe that the vertices of each graph can be
partitioned into three parts, H, I, and R, defined as follows.


Definition 12 The high-degree set of a graph G is the set H := {v ∈ V (G) : deg(v) >
k}. The isolated set of G is the set I := {v ∈ V (G) \ H : N (v) ⊆ H}. The remaining
set of G is the set R := V (G) \ (H ∪ I).


   If G has a vertex cover of size at most k, then the sizes of H and R can be bounded
above by a function of k.


Lemma 89 If G is a graph with a vertex cover of size at most k, then the high-degree
set satisfies |H| ≤ k, the remaining set satisfies |R| ≤ k 2 + k, and G[R] has at most k 2
edges.


    Proof: Let v ∈ H, and suppose S is a vertex cover of G of size at most k. We know
v ∈ S because otherwise all neighbors of v would belong to S, which is impossible since
|S| ≤ k. Therefore, we have |H| ≤ |S| ≤ k.
   The bound on the size of R follows from the standard Buss kernelization algorithm
for Vertex Cover. Consider the following two reduction rules: (1) If G contains an
                                            206
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                    Chapter 4


isolated vertex v, then delete v from G; (2) If G contains a vertex v of degree more than
k, then delete v from G and decrease k by 1. If we apply these rules exhaustively to a
graph with a vertex cover of size at most k, then the resulting graph has at most k 2 + k
vertices and at most k 2 edges [94].
    Let G be a graph with a vertex cover of size at most k, and let H, I, and R be the
high-degree set, the isolated set, and the remaining set of G, respectively. Suppose we
exhaustively apply the above reduction rules to G. Let H ′ be the set of vertices deleted
by reduction rule (2), let I ′ be the set of vertices deleted by reduction rule (1), and let
R′ = V (G) \ (H ′ ∪ I ′ ).
    We know G[R′ ] has at most k 2 + k vertices and at most k 2 edges, and we claim that
R ⊆ R′ . We have H ′ ⊆ H since the degree of a vertex can only decrease when we delete
other vertices. To see that I ′ ⊆ I, let v ∈ I ′ . We first check that v ∈
                                                                         / H. If v ∈ H, then
for v to become isolated, all of its neighbors would need to be deleted by reduction rule
(2). However, that would mean G has more than k vertices of degree more than k, which
is impossible since G has a vertex cover of size at most k. To see that N (v) ⊆ H, we
first observe that N (v) ⊆ H ′ ∪ I ′ since v is isolated at the moment when it is deleted.
No two vertices in I ′ can be adjacent because if they were, then neither one would ever
be isolated. This means N (v) is in fact contained in H ′ ⊆ H, so v ∈ I. Thus we have
I ′ ⊆ I, so R′ ⊇ R as desired.
    Algorithm overview. We consider all possibilities for the sizes of H, I, and R that
could occur in an n-vertex graph G with a vertex cover of size at most k. Suppose we
have guessed that |H| = h, |I| = i, and |R| = r, where h + i + r = n. We will describe
how to count the number of graphs with H = [h], I = [h + 1, h + i], and R = [h + i + 1, n].
To consider all possibilities for the label set of these three subgraphs, we then multiply
this result by nh n−h
                     
                    i
                       .
                       h
    We loop over all 2(2) possibilities for the edges of G[H], and for each of these, we
                                            207
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                    Chapter 4


proceed as follows. For each vertex v ∈ H, we consider all possibilities for its degree into
I and R, i.e., we guess the values of |N (v) ∩ I| and |N (v) ∩ R|. Degree values that are
greater than k (and some others) can all be bucketed into a single category. For each of
these guesses, we compute the number of possibilities for G[H ∪ I] and G[H ∪ R] and
then multiply those two results.
   The subgraph G[H ∪ I]: There are no edges in G[I] since I is an independent set, so
we just need to count the possibilities for the edges between H and I. If we have guessed
that the vertex v ∈ H has |N (v) ∩ I| = dv , then there are div possibilities for N (v) ∩ I.
                                                               

Even if we just have a lower bound, e.g., we have guessed that |N (v) ∩ I| > k, it is easy
to compute the number of possibilities for N (v) ∩ I in a similar way.
   The subgraph G[H ∪ R]: We loop over all possibilities for the edges of G[R], knowing
that this subgraph has at most k 2 + k vertices and at most k 2 edges. In this loop, we
only consider subgraphs G[R] such that all vertices have degree at least 1 and such that
G[R] has a vertex cover of size at most k − h. Suppose we have a particular guess for
G[R] in mind, as well as a guess for G[H] from above. What remains now is to count
the possibilities for the edges between H and R. For each vertex v ∈ H, we have already
guessed the degree of v into R. For each vertex v ∈ R, the degree of v into H must be
at most k − dv , where dv is the degree of v in G[R], since v ∈
                                                              / H. Using this information
about the degrees, we run a divide and conquer algorithm to compute the number of
possibilities for G[H ∪ R].


4.4.1     Algorithm for Theorem 11

   The following procedures describe the algorithm for Theorem 11 in detail. To run
the algorithm, one would call Count VC Graphs(n, k).
   We refer to h-dimensional vectors as h-tuples, where h is a nonnegative integer. For

                                            208
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                            Chapter 4


h-tuples d = (d1 , . . . , dh ) and dˆ = (dˆ1 , . . . , dˆh ), we write d − dˆ to denote the h-tuple
(d1 − dˆ1 . . . , dh − dˆh ).
    As mentioned above, each guess for |N (v) ∩ R| is either an exact number or a lower
bound (e.g., ≥ k + 1). To distinguish between these two types of guesses, we use an
h-tuple of booleans eH = (e1 , . . . , eh ): the guess for v ∈ [h] is an exact number if and
only if ev = true. This is will be used in the function Count HR(k, i, r, dH ).

Count VC Graphs(n, k):

Return
                                  X nn − h
                                               Count HIR(k, h, i, r),
                                     h    i
                                (h,i,r)∈I

where I = {(h, i, r) : 0 ≤ h ≤ k, 0 ≤ i ≤ n − h, r = n − h − i, r ≤ k 2 + k}.

Count HIR(k, h, i, r):

Let H be the set of all graphs with vertex set [h]. For GH ∈ H, let DGH be the set
of pairs (dIH , dR              I     I            I        R     R            R
                 H ) such that dH = (d1 , . . . , dh ) and dH = (d1 , . . . , dh ) are h-tuples with

the following property: for each v ∈ [h], we have 0 ≤ dIv ≤ k + 1 − degGH (v) and
                          I
dR
 v = k + 1 − degGH (v) − dv . Return

                       X
                                    Count HI(k, i, GH , dIH ) · Count HR(k, i, r, dR
                                                                                   H ).
                       GH ∈H
                  (dIH ,dR
                         H )∈DGH



Count HI(k, i, GH , dH ):

Let s = 1, and write dH = (d1 , . . . , dh ). For each v ∈ V (GH ), we do the following. If
dv ≤ k − degGH (v), then we multiply s by div . Otherwise, we multiply s by ij=dv ji .
                                                                                P       

Return s.

Count HR(k, i, r, dH ):

Let h be the length of the tuple dH . Let R be the set of graphs GR with vertex set
{h + i + 1, . . . , h + i + r} and at most k 2 edges such that 1 ≤ degGR (v) ≤ k for all
                                                     209
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                   Chapter 4


v ∈ V (GR ), and such that GR has a vertex cover of size at most k − h. For GR ∈ R, let
dGR = (k − d1 , k − d2 , . . . , k − dr ), where dv = degGR (h + i + v) for each v ∈ [r]. Let eH be
                                                          P
an h-tuple in which every entry is false. Return GR ∈R Div Conq(dH , dGR , eH , 1, r).

Div Conq(dH , dR , eH , s, t):

Write dH = (d1 , . . . , dh ), dR = (d′1 , . . . , d′r ), and eH = (e1 , . . . , eh ). For the base case, if
t−s ≤ 0, we do the following. If dv > 1 for some v ∈ [h], we return 0. Now suppose dv ≤ 1
for all v ∈ [h]. If s = t + 1, then let davailable = 0, and otherwise, let davailable = d′s . Let
dneeded be the number of vertices v ∈ [h] such that dv = 1, and let ddiff = davailable −dneeded .
Lastly, let doptional be the number of vertices v ∈ [h] such that dv = 0 and ev = false. If
doptional ≤ ddiff , return 2doptional . Otherwise, return di=0
                                                         P diff doptional 
                                                                    i
                                                                            .
    If t − s > 0, meaning we are not in the base case, then we proceed as follows.
Let m = ⌈ s+t
           2
              ⌉. Let D be the set of pairs (dˆH , êH ) such that dˆH = (dˆ1 , . . . , dˆh ) and
êH = (ê1 , . . . , êh ) are h-tuples that satisfy the following for all v ∈ [h]:

    • If ev = true, then 0 ≤ dˆv ≤ dv and êv = true.

    • If ev = false, then we either have êv = true and 0 ≤ dˆv < dv , or we have
       êv = false and dˆv = dv .

Return
          X
                Div Conq(dˆH , dR , êH , s, m − 1) · Div Conq(dH − dˆH , dR , eH , m, t).
      (dˆH , êH )∈D


4.4.2        Proof of correctness

    Suppose we have been given n and k as input. To prove correctness of the algorithm
above, we need to show that Count VC Graphs(n, k) returns the number of graphs
with vertex set [n] that have a vertex cover of size at most k. We work our way up
through each of the procedures, starting with Div Conq.
                                                   210
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                                   Chapter 4


   We say the arguments (dH , dR , eH , s, t) are in the domain of Div Conq if they have
the following properties for some (h, i, r) ∈ I: The h-tuples dH = (d1 , . . . , dh ) and
dR = (d′1 , . . . , d′r ) are such that 0 ≤ dv ≤ k + 1 for all v ∈ [h] and 0 ≤ d′v < k for all
v ∈ [r], and eH is an h-tuple of booleans. We also require s, t ∈ [r] and t ≥ s − 1.
   We say the arguments (dH , dR , eH , s, t) come from (h, i, r) if the above properties
hold for this particular triple (h, i, r) ∈ I. For some intuition, this is true when the
calculations that we are currently doing come from calling Count HIR(k, h, i, r) in
Count VC Graphs.
   Let (h, i, r) ∈ I be fixed. Suppose dH = (d1 , . . . , dh ) and dR = (d′1 , . . . , d′r ) are such
that 0 ≤ dv ≤ k + 1 for all v ∈ [h] and 0 ≤ d′v < k for all v ∈ [r]. Also, suppose eH is an
h-tuple of booleans. Let H = [h], and let R = [h + i + 1, h + i + r]. For a bipartite graph
GB with bipartition (H, R′ ), where R′ ⊆ R, we say GB has degrees given by (dH , dR , eH )
if GB has the following properties:

   • for every v ∈ H such that ev = true, we have deg(v) = dv

   • for every v ∈ H such that ev = false, we have deg(v) ≥ dv

   • for every h + i + v ∈ R′ , we have deg(h + i + v) ≤ d′v .


Lemma 90 Suppose the arguments (dH , dR , eH , s, t) are in the domain of Div Conq,
and suppose they come from (h, i, r) ∈ I. Let H = [h], and let R
                                                               e = [h + i + s, h + i + t].

The procedure Div Conq(dH , dR , eH , s, t) computes the number of bipartite graphs with
bipartition (H, R)
                e that have degrees given by (dH , dR , eH ).


    Proof: Write dH = (d1 , . . . , dh ), dR = (d′1 , . . . , d′r ), and eH = (e1 , . . . , eh ). We proceed
by induction. For the base case, suppose t − s ≤ 0. This means we either have s = t or
s = t + 1, so |R|
               e is either 1 or 0. If dv > 1 for some v ∈ [h], then there are no such graphs


                                                   211
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                              Chapter 4


since there is at most one vertex (the one in e
                                              R, if it exists) that v can be adjacent to.
Now suppose dv ≤ 1 for all v ∈ [h].
                                                     e = {h + i + s}. We have davailable =
    First, consider the case when s = t, which means R
d′s , which is the upper bound on the degree of the vertex h + i + s ∈ e
                                                                       R. Each vertex
in H that is counted in the definition of dneeded must have degree 1 in every bipartite
graph that has the properties described above. Also, doptional is equal to the number of
vertices v ∈ H that are allowed to have degree 0 or 1. We can choose any subset W of
these doptional vertices to have degree 1, as long as the degree of the vertex h + i + s ∈ R
                                                                                           e

does not exceed davailable . Recall that ddiff = davailable − dneeded . If doptional ≤ ddiff , then the
degree of h + i + s ∈ R
                      e will never exceed davailable , so the number of possible graphs is

2doptional . Otherwise, h + i + s ∈ R
                                    e has degree at most davailable if and only if |W | ≤ ddiff ,

so the number of possible graphs is di=0
                                       P diff doptional 
                                                  i
                                                          .
                                                                    e = ∅ and davailable = 0,
    The case when s = t + 1 is a bit simpler. In this case, we have R
so ddiff ≤ 0. If ddiff < 0, then there clearly are no possible graphs, and indeed we return
0. Now suppose ddiff = 0. Regardless of whether or not we have doptional ≤ ddiff , we know
there is only one possible graph, namely the graph with no edges. Hence it is correct to
return 2doptional or di=0
                    P diff doptional 
                               i
                                       , both of which are equal to 1 in their respective cases.
    Next, suppose we are not in the base case. In other words, suppose the arguments
(dH , dR , eH , s, t) satisfy t − s > 0. For the induction hypothesis, suppose Div Conq
returns the correct number of graphs, as described in the lemma statement, whenever the
last two arguments s′ and t′ satisfy t′ −s′ < t−s. We claim that Div Conq(dH , dR , eH , s, t)
correctly computes the desired number of graphs as well.
    Let R                                         e2 = [h + i + m, h + i + t], where m = ⌈ s+t ⌉.
        e1 := [h + i + s, h + i + m − 1], and let R
                                                                                            2

Using these sets, the edges of a bipartite graph with bipartition (H, R)
                                                                      e can be partitioned

into two parts: the edges incident to vertices in R
                                                  e1 , and the edges incident to vertices
   e2 . More precisely, let (dˆH , êH ) ∈ D. Let GB be the set of bipartite graphs GB with
in R
                                                 212
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                          Chapter 4


               R) such that GB has degrees given by (dH , dR , eH ) and GB [H ∪ R
bipartition (H, e                                                               e1 ] has

degrees given by (dˆH , dR , êH ).

Claim 1. The set GB is in one-to-one correspondence with the set of pairs (G1 , G2 ) with
the following properties:

    • G1 is a bipartite graph with bipartition (H, R
                                                   e1 ), and G2 is a bipartite graph with

      bipartition (H, R
                      e2 )


    • G1 has degrees given by (dˆH , dR , êH )

    • G2 has degrees given by (dH − dˆH , dR , eH ).

Proof of Claim 1. Suppose GB ∈ GB . Let G1 = GB [H ∪ R
                                                     e1 ], and let G2 = GB [H ∪ R
                                                                                e2 ].

Suppose v ∈ H. If we are in the case where ev = true, then êv = true by the definition
of D. In this case, we have degG (v) = dv and degG1 (v) = dˆv since G1 has degrees given by
(dˆH , dR , êH ), so degG2 (v) = dv −dˆv . If we are in the case where ev = false and êv = true,
then we have degG (v) ≥ dv and degG1 (v) = dˆv , which implies degG2 (v) ≥ dv − dˆv . Lastly,
if we are in the case where ev = false and êv = false, then dˆv = dv by the definition of
D, so degG2 (v) ≥ 0 = dv − dˆv . The graph G2 also satisfies the requirements for the degrees
of the vertices in R
                   e2 since the same is true for GB . Therefore, G2 has degrees given by

(dH − dˆH , dR , eH ). This shows that we have a map that takes each graph GB ∈ GB to a
pair (G1 , G2 ) with the desired properties, and it is easy to see that this map is a bijection.
This proves the claim.

    By Claim 1, for each choice of (dˆH , êH ) ∈ D, the number of graphs in GB is equal to
Div Conq(dˆH , dR , êH , s, m − 1) · Div Conq(dH − dˆH , dR , eH , m, t). If GB is defined as
above using the pair (dˆH , êH ) ∈ D, and if GB′ is defined as above using a distinct pair
(dˆ′H , ê′H ) ∈ D, then we know GB ∩ GB′ = ∅ by the definition of D. Furthermore, D was


                                                  213
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                       Chapter 4


defined so that it covers all possibilities for the degrees of the vertices in GB [H ∪ R
                                                                                       e1 ].

Therefore, Div Conq correctly computes the desired number of graphs.
   Let (h, i, r) ∈ I, H = [h], and R = [h + i + 1, n]. In the next lemma, we show that
Count HR computes the number of possibilities for G[H ∪ R].


Lemma 91 Let GH be a graph with vertex set H, and suppose dH = (d1 , . . . , dh ) is such
that 0 ≤ dv ≤ k + 1 for all v ∈ H. The procedure Count HR(k, i, r, dH ) computes the
number of graphs G with vertex set H ∪ R such that G[H] = GH , |N (v) ∩ R| ≥ dv for all
v ∈ H, G[R] has at most k 2 edges, degG (v) ≤ k and degG[R] (v) ≥ 1 for all v ∈ R, and
G[R] has a vertex cover of size at most k − h.


    Proof: The set R is precisely the set of possibilities for G[R]. For a vertex v ∈ R
that has degree dv in the induced subgraph G[R], requiring that |N (v) ∩ H| ≤ k − dv is
equivalent to requiring that degG (v) ≤ k. For GR ∈ R, let dGR = (d′1 , . . . , d′r ) and eH be
defined as in Count HR. To see that the arguments (dH , dGR , eH , 1, r) are in the domain
of Div Conq, we just need to check that 0 ≤ d′v < k for all v ∈ [r]. This is true since
1 ≤ degR (v) ≤ k for all v ∈ V (GR ) by the definition of R. Therefore, by Lemma 90, is
                    P
it correct to return GR ∈R Div Conq(dH , dGR , eH , 1, r).
   Let H = [h], and let I = [h + 1, h + i]. In the next lemma, we show that Count HI
computes the number of possibilities for G[H ∪ I].


Lemma 92 Let GH be a graph with vertex set H, and suppose dH = (d1 , . . . , dh ) is such
that 0 ≤ dv ≤ k + 1 − degGH (v) for all v ∈ H. The procedure Count HI(k, i, r, dH )
computes the number of graphs G with vertex set H ∪ I such that G[H] = GH , such that
I is an independent set, and such that the following holds for all v ∈ H: |N (v) ∩ I| = dv
if dv ≤ k − degGH (v), and |N (v) ∩ I| ≥ dv if dv = k + 1 − degGH (v).


    Proof: Since G[H] and G[I] are fixed, we just need to compute the number of
                                             214
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                  Chapter 4


possibilities for N (v) ∩ I for each vertex v ∈ H. If dv ≤ k − degGH (v), then the number
of possibilities is div , and otherwise, the number of possibilities is ij=dv ji .
                                                                      P        

   For Count HIR, we first need a way to characterize the high-degree set, isolated
set, and remaining set of the graph.


Lemma 93 Let G be a graph with vertex set [n]. Suppose H, I, and R are disjoint
subsets of [n] such that H ∪ I ∪ R = [n] and |H| ≤ k. Then G has a vertex cover of size
at most k and H is the high-degree set, I is the isolated set, and R is the remaining set
of G if and only if these sets have the following properties:

  1. deg(v) > k for all v ∈ H

  2. I is an independent set

  3. degG (v) ≤ k for all v ∈ R

  4. degG[R] (v) ≥ 1 for all v ∈ R

  5. G[R] has a vertex cover of size at most k − |H|

  6. G has no edges with one endpoint in I and the other in R

  7. G[R] has at most k 2 edges.


    Proof: For the forward direction, suppose G has a vertex cover of size at most k
and H is the high-degree set, I is the isolated set, and R is the remaining set of G.
Properties (1), (3), and (6) follow immediately from the definitions of the high-degree
set, the isolated set, and the remaining set. Property (2) holds because if there were a
vertex v ∈ I with a neighbor in I, then we would not have N (v) ⊆ H. Property (4)
holds because if there were a vertex v ∈ R with degG[R] (v) = 0, then v would actually
belong to I. For property (5), suppose S is a vertex cover of G of size at most k. We
                                            215
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                          Chapter 4


know H ⊆ S, so S \ (H ∪ I) is a vertex cover of G[R] of size at most k − |H|. Property
(7) follows from Lemma 89.
   For the other direction, suppose properties (1)-(7) hold. Let e
                                                                 H, e
                                                                    I, and R
                                                                           e be the

high-degree set, isolated set, and remaining set of G, respectively. Clearly H ⊆ e
                                                                                 H. We
have N (v) ⊆ H for all v ∈ I by properties (2) and (6), and no vertex in I can have degree
more than k since |H| ≤ k. Hence I ⊆ e
                                     I. We know R ∩ H
                                                    e = ∅ by property (3), and

property (4) says that degG[R] (v) ≥ 1 for all v ∈ R, so every vertex in R has a neighbor
                        H. This implies R ⊆ e
that does not belong to e                   R. Therefore, H = e
                                                              H, I = e
                                                                     I, and R = e
                                                                                R.
To see that G has a vertex cover of size at most k, let S be vertex cover of G[R] of size
at most k − |H|. The set S ∪ H is a vertex cover of G since I is an independent set, and
we have |S ∪ H| ≤ k.


Lemma 94 Let (h, i, r) ∈ I, H = [h], I = [h + 1, h + i], and R = [h + i + 1, n]. The
procedure Count HIR(k, h, i, r) computes the number of graphs G with vertex set [n]
that have a vertex cover of size at most k and have high-degree set H, isolated set I, and
remaining set R.


     Proof: In Count HIR, we sum over GH ∈ H to consider all possiblities for G[H].
For each v ∈ H, the value dIv is a guess for |N (v)∩I|. If dIv ≤ k −degGH (v), then our guess
is that |N (v) ∩ I| = dIv ; if dIv = k + 1 − degGH (v), then our guess is that |N (v) ∩ I| ≥ dIv .
Similarly, each value dR
                       v is a guess for |N (v) ∩ R|. Every one of these is a lower bound,

i.e. our guess is that |N (v) ∩ R| ≥ dR                                             I      R
                                      v . The set DGH covers all possibilities for dv and dv

in a graph such that deg(v) > k for all v ∈ H. Therefore, by Lemmas 91 and 92, the
summation returned by Count HIR computes the number of graphs with vertex set [n]
such that H, I, and R satisfy properties (1)-(7) from Lemma 93. By that lemma, this
is equal to the number of graphs with vertex set [n] that have a vertex cover of size at
most k and have high-degree set H, isolated set I, and remaining set R.
                                               216
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                           Chapter 4


   For Count VC Graphs, we need to show that the number of graphs does not
depend on the particular choices of the labels in each of the sets H, I, and R. Suppose
A = {a1 , . . . , ar } and B = {b1 , . . . , br } are finite subsets of N such that |A| = |B|, where
the elements ai and bi are listed in increasing order. We define ϕ(A, B) : A → B as the
bijection that maps ai to bi for all i ∈ [r].


Lemma 95 Let (h, i, r) ∈ I. Let H = [h], I = [h + 1, h + i], and R = [h + i + 1, n].
Suppose H ′ , I ′ , and R′ are disjoint subsets of [n] such that H ′ ∪ I ′ ∪ R′ = [n], |H ′ | = h,
|I ′ | = i, and |R′ | = r. Let Gn,k be the set of graphs with vertex set [n] that have a vertex
cover of size at most k. Let G be the set of graphs in Gn,k that have high-degree set
H, isolated set I, and remaining set R. Also, let G ′ be the set of graphs Gn,k that have
high-degree set H ′ , isolated set I ′ , and remaining set R′ . Then |G| = |G ′ |.


     Proof: Let f : G → G ′ be the bijection defined as follows: for each G ∈ G, f (G) is the
graph obtained by applying ϕ(H, H ′ ) to the labels in H, applying ϕ(I, I ′ ) to the labels
in I, and applying ϕ(R, R′ ) to the labels in R. The map f is a bijection since each of the
relabeling functions is a bijection, so |G| = |G ′ |.


Lemma 96 The procedure Count VC Graphs(n, k) computes the number of graphs
G with vertex set [n] that have a vertex cover of size at most k.


     Proof: Let G be such a graph, and let H, I and R be the high-degree set, isolated
set, and remaining set, respectively. We have |H| ≤ k and |R| ≤ k 2 + k by Lemma 89,
so I indeed covers all possible values of h = |H|, i = |I|, r = |R|.
    Given (h, i, r) ∈ I, there are nh n−h
                                         
                                        i
                                            possible ways of choosing disjoint subsets H,
I, and R of [n] such that H ∪ I ∪ R = [n], |H| = h, |I| = i, and |R| = r. Fix any such
choice of H, I, and R. By Lemmas 94 and 95, the number of graphs with vertex set


                                                217
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                       Chapter 4


[n] and a vertex cover of size at most k that have high-degree set H, isolated set I, and
remaining set R is equal to Count HIR(k, h, i, r). Therefore, it is correct to return

                         X nn − h
                                      Count HIR(k, h, i, r).
                            h    i
                       (h,i,r)∈I




4.4.3     Running time

   All of the running times that we discuss here are measured in terms of the number of
arithmetic operations. At the start of this algorithm (Theorem 11), we first compute all
of the necessary binomial coefficients. In particular, we compute all values of ab such
                                                                                  

that 0 ≤ a ≤ n and 0 ≤ b ≤ a, which can be done in O(n2 ) time.
   For ℓ ≥ 0, let T (ℓ) be the maximum running time of Div Conq(dH , dR , eH , s, t)
across all values of (dH , dR , eH , s, t) in the domain such that ℓ = t − s + 1. The base case
of Div Conq takes O(k) time. We have |D| ≤ (k + 2)k · 2k since h ≤ k, which gives us
the recurrence
                                                               
                   T (ℓ) = (k + 2)k · 2k · T (⌈ℓ/2⌉) + T (⌊ℓ/2⌋) + O(1).

By standard arguments such as the master theorem, we can see that T (ℓ) = ℓO(k log(k)) .
   For Count HR, suppose the arguments are (k, i, r, dH ). We have
                                               k2 +k
                                       2                         2
                              |R| ≤ (k + 1)       2       = k O(k )
                                                 k2

since each graph in R has r ≤ k 2 + k vertices and at most k 2 edges. To construct R,
we first build the set of all graphs with vertex set {h + i + 1, . . . , h + i + r} and at most
k 2 edges (and the correct degrees), and then for each such graph, we check if it has a
vertex cover of size at most k − h, which can be done in time O(2k n2 ) using the standard

                                              218
Counting Yes-Instances of Vertex Deletion Problems in FPT Time                   Chapter 4


branching algorithm. Calling Div Conq with s = 1 and t = r takes rO(k log k) = k O(k log k)
                                                                 2
time, so the running time of Count HR(k, i, r, dH ) is k O(k ) n2 .
   It is easy to see that the running time of Count HI(k, i, GH , dH ) is O(hn) = O(kn).
                                                                       h
For Count HIR, suppose the arguments are (k, h, i, r). We have |H| = 2(2) ≤ 2k
                                                                               2




and |DGH | ≤ (k + 2)k , so the running time of Count HIR(k, h, i, r) is dominated by
                                                  2
the running time of Count HR, which is k O(k ) n2 . For Count VC Graphs, we have
                                                  2
|I| = O(kn), so the overall running time is k O(k ) n3 arithmetic operations.




                                            219
Chapter 5

Concluding Remarks and Open
Problems

Interval graphs and permutation graphs are two graph classes with a relatively simple
structure for which there might be efficient counting and sampling algorithms. These
problems are semi-open, in the sense that they might be open, but it might also be the
case that polynomial-time algorithms follow from other results about these graph classes
that are phrased in different language (e.g., generating function results). The next step
for these two graph classes would be to analyze what is known (see Section 1.2) and
determine whether polynomial-time algorithms follow from these results.
   There are many graph classes for which the problems of efficient counting and sam-
pling are fully open including graphs of bounded degeneracy, graphs of bounded treewidth,
chordal bipartite graphs, distance-hereditary graphs, perfect graphs, strongly chordal
graphs, and weakly chordal graphs. These problems are also open for many other graph
classes characterized by a finite set of forbidden minors, subgraphs, or induced subgraphs.
It is worth noting that for some well-known graph classes of this form, such as planar
graphs, polynomial-time algorithms are known [23, 24]. In the next few sections, we

                                           220
Concluding Remarks and Open Problems                                            Chapter 5


discuss open problems that follow naturally from our results.



5.1     Labeled Chordal Graphs

   In Chapter 2, we designed algorithms for exact counting and uniform sampling of
labeled chordal graphs that use O(n7 ) arithmetic operations (i.e., in O(n9 log n) time in
the RAM model). A natural open problem is to design a substantially faster algorithm
for exact counting or uniform sampling of chordal graphs. We also designed approx-
imate counting and approximate sampling algorithms for labeled chordal graphs that
run in O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)) deterministic time and O(n3 log n log7 (1/ε)) expected time,
respectively. Both of these algorithms are quite fast. However, one could argue that our
approximate sampling algorithm is unsatisfactory in the sense that it can never output
a non-split chordal graph. Therefore, another interesting open problem would be to ask
for an approximate sampling algorithm with a stronger guarantee: namely, a sampling
algorithm such that for every chordal graph G, we have (1 − ε)p ≤ Pr(G) ≤ (1 + ε)p,
where p is the probability given by the uniform distribution over all chordal graphs and
Pr(G) is the probability that the approximate sampling algorithm outputs the graph G.
Two interesting approaches to consider for this are Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms
and the Boltzmann sampling scheme used in [24] for planar graphs.



5.2     Unlabeled Chordal Graphs

   In Chapter 3, we built upon the algorithm of Wormald for generating random unla-
beled graphs to design an algorithm that, given n, generates a random unlabeled chordal
graph on n vertices in expected polynomial time. This serves as a proof of concept that
one can obtain a sampling algorithm for unlabeled graphs from a GI-complete graph class

                                           221
Concluding Remarks and Open Problems                                           Chapter 5


G using the following two ingredients: (1) an FPT algorithm for counting labeled graphs
in G with a given automorphism π parameterized by the number of moved points of π and
(2) a bound on the probability that a labeled graph in G has a given automorphism. A few
potential candidates for this are bipartite graphs, strongly chordal graphs, and chordal
bipartite graphs, all of which are GI-complete. An additional open problem would be to
design a uniform, or approximately uniform, sampling algorithm ––– either for unlabeled
chordal graphs or general unlabeled graphs ––– that runs in expected polynomial time
even when we condition on the output graph.



5.3      Yes-Instances of Parameterized Vertex Deletion

         Problems

   In Chapter 4, we designed algorithms for counting labeled yes-instances of several
vertex deletion problems: Vertex Cover, Cluster Vertex Deletion, Feedback
Vertex Set in Tournaments, and Split Vertex Deletion. Our best algorithm
                                                        2
for counting yes-instances of Vertex Cover uses k O(k ) n3 arithmetic operations, and
the other three counting algorithms have running times that are double exponential in
k, the number of vertices deleted. From the first of these, we can also derive a sam-
                                                                                    2
pling algorithm that generates a random yes-instance of Vertex Cover using k O(k ) n3
arithmetic operations. The topic of counting yes-instances of parameterized problems
has been largely unexplored until now, so there are many open problems. Here is a list
of some open problems that come to mind. In this list, all graphs are labeled unless
specified otherwise.

   • Is there an algorithm for counting yes-instances of Vertex Cover that runs in
               2                                  2
      time 2O(k ) nO(1) ? How about in time 2o(n ) ?

                                            222
Concluding Remarks and Open Problems                                             Chapter 5


   • Is there an FPT algorithm for counting yes-instances of Cluster Vertex Dele-
     tion, Feedback Vertex Set in Tournaments, or Split Vertex Deletion
     whose running time is single exponential in k?

   • Is there an FPT sampling algorithm that generates random yes-instances of Clus-
     ter Vertex Deletion, Feedback Vertex Set in Tournaments, or Split
     Vertex Deletion?

   • Are there FPT algorithms for counting yes-instances of other vertex deletion prob-
     lems, such as Cograph Vertex Deletion or Feedback Vertex Set in gen-
     eral graphs?

   • So far, all known algorithms for counting yes-instances of a vertex deletion problem
     are inspired by the FPT algorithm or kernel for the corresponding deletion problem.
     Is there an FPT (or perhaps even polynomial-time) algorithm for counting yes-
     instances of a W[1]-hard vertex deletion problem (such as deletion to bounded
     degeneracy graphs, perfect graphs, or weakly chordal graphs)? Or can this be
     ruled out under plausible assumptions?

   To design the faster algorithm (with single-exponential running time) for counting
yes-instances of Vertex Cover in Chapter 4, we used ideas inspired by the Buss kernel
for Vertex Cover. It is likely that one could also design a faster algorithm for counting
yes-instances of Cluster Vertex Deletion by using ideas from the kernel for that
problem.
   For graph classes where we do not yet have an FPT counting algorithm, if the graph
class can be characterized by a finite set of forbidden induced subgraphs, then one can use
the inclusion-exclusion approach from Chapter 4 to reduce to a variation of the problem
with given deletion sets. As long as we can design an FPT algorithm for the problem with

                                           223
given deletion sets, then we will also have an FPT algorithm for the original counting
problem.




                                         224
Bibliography

 [1] M. R. Jerrum, L. G. Valiant, and V. V. Vazirani, Random generation of
     combinatorial structures from a uniform distribution, Theoretical Computer
     Science 43 (1986) 169–188.

 [2] M. Jerrum, Counting, sampling and integrating: Algorithms and complexity.
     Springer Science & Business Media, 2003.

 [3] G. Tinhofer, Generating graphs uniformly at random, Computational Graph Theory
     (1990) 235–255.

 [4] C. Greenhill, The complexity of counting colourings and independent sets in sparse
     graphs and hypergraphs, Computational Complexity 9 (2000) 52–72.

 [5] L. G. Valiant, The complexity of enumeration and reliability problems, SIAM
     Journal on Computing 8 (1979) 410–421.

 [6] L. G. Valiant, The complexity of computing the permanent, Theoretical Computer
     Science 8 (1979) 189–201.

 [7] N. Linial, Hard enumeration problems in geometry and combinatorics, SIAM
     Journal on Algebraic Discrete Methods 7 (1986) 331–335.

 [8] M. Jerrum, A. Sinclair, and E. Vigoda, A polynomial-time approximation
     algorithm for the permanent of a matrix with nonnegative entries, Journal of the
     ACM (JACM) 51 (2004) 671–697.

 [9] M. Jerrum, A very simple algorithm for estimating the number of k-colorings of a
     low-degree graph, Random Structures & Algorithms 7 (1995) 157–165.

[10] J. Liu, A. Sinclair, and P. Srivastava, A deterministic algorithm for counting
     colorings with 2∆ colors, in 2019 IEEE 60th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
     Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 1380–1404, IEEE, 2019.

[11] Z. Chen, K. Liu, and E. Vigoda, Optimal mixing of glauber dynamics: Entropy
     factorization via high-dimensional expansion, in Proceedings of the 53rd Annual
     ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 1537–1550, 2021.
                                          225
[12] A. Sly, Computational transition at the uniqueness threshold, in 2010 IEEE 51st
     Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 287–296, IEEE, 2010.

[13] J. H. Van Lint and R. M. Wilson, A course in combinatorics. Cambridge
     University Press, 2001.

[14] P. W. Kasteleyn, Dimer statistics and phase transitions, Journal of Mathematical
     Physics 4 (1963) 287–293.

[15] W. Sun and I. Bezáková, Sampling random chordal graphs by MCMC (student
     abstract), in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34,
     pp. 13929–13930, 2020.

[16] N. C. Wormald, Generating random unlabelled graphs, SIAM Journal on
     Computing 16 (1987) 717–727.

[17] H. S. Wilf, generatingfunctionology. CRC press, 2005.

[18] T. Saitoh, Y. Otachi, K. Yamanaka, and R. Uehara, Random generation and
     enumeration of bipartite permutation graphs, Journal of Discrete Algorithms 10
     (2012) 84–97.

[19] D. G. Corneil, H. Lerchs, and L. S. Burlingham, Complement reducible graphs,
     Discrete Applied Mathematics 3 (1981) 163–174.

[20] P. Hanlon, Counting interval graphs, Transactions of the American Mathematical
     Society 272 (1982) 383–426.

[21] M. Bodirsky and M. Kang, Generating outerplanar graphs uniformly at random,
     Combinatorics, Probability and Computing 15 (2006) 333–343.

[22] A. Brandstädt, V. B. Le, and J. P. Spinrad, Graph classes: A survey. SIAM, 1999.

[23] M. Bodirsky, C. Gröpl, and M. Kang, Generating labeled planar graphs uniformly
     at random, Theoretical Computer Science 379 (2007) 377–386.

[24] É. Fusy, Uniform random sampling of planar graphs in linear time, Random
     Structures & Algorithms 35 (2009) 464–522.

[25] M. Bodirsky, C. Gröpl, and M. Kang, Sampling unlabeled biconnected planar
     graphs, in Algorithms and Computation: 16th International Symposium, ISAAC
     2005, Sanya, Hainan, China, December 19-21, 2005. Proceedings 16, pp. 593–603,
     Springer, 2005.

[26] M. Bodirsky, C. Gröpl, and M. Kang, Generating unlabeled connected cubic planar
     graphs uniformly at random, Random Structures & Algorithms 32 (2008) 157–180.

                                           226
[27] T. Saitoh, K. Yamanaka, M. Kiyomi, and R. Uehara, Random generation and
     enumeration of proper interval graphs, IEICE TRANSACTIONS on Information
     and Systems 93 (2010) 1816–1823.

[28] V. Bı́na and J. Přibil, Note on enumeration of labeled split graphs,
     Commentationes Mathematicae Universitatis Carolinae 56 (2015) 133–137.

[29] L. Comtet, Permutations by number of rises; Eulerian numbers, Advanced
     Combinatorics: The Art of Finite and Infinite Expansions (1974) 51.

[30] S. Spiro, Counting labeled threshold graphs with Eulerian numbers, Australasian
     Journal of Combinatorics 77 (2020) 249–255.

[31] J. S. Beissinger and U. N. Peled, Enumeration of labelled threshold graphs and a
     theorem of Frobenius involving Eulerian polynomials, Graphs and Combinatorics 3
     (1987) 213–219.

[32] H. Prüfer, Neuer beweis eines satzes über permutationen, Arch. Math. Phys 27
     (1918) 742–744.

[33] OEIS Foundation Inc., Entry A058862 in the on-line encyclopedia of integer
     sequences, 2023. Published electronically at http://oeis.org.

[34] H. S. Wilf, The uniform selection of free trees, Journal of Algorithms 2 (1981)
     204–207.

[35] D. R. Lick and A. T. White, k-degenerate graphs, Canadian Journal of
     Mathematics 22 (1970) 1082–1096.

[36] M. Cygan, F. V. Fomin, L. Kowalik, D. Lokshtanov, D. Marx, M. Pilipczuk,
     M. Pilipczuk, and S. Saurabh, Parameterized algorithms, vol. 5. Springer, 2015.

[37] A. Hajnal and J. Surányi, Über die auflösung von graphen in vollständige
     teilgraphen, Ann. Univ. Sci. Budapest, Eötvös Sect. Math 1 (1958) 113–121.

[38] P. Buneman et. al., A characterisation of rigid circuit graphs., Discrete Math 9
     (1974) 205–212.

[39] J. R. Walter, Representations of rigid cycle graphs. Wayne State University, 1972.

[40] F. Gavril, Algorithms for minimum coloring, maximum clique, minimum covering
     by cliques, and maximum independent set of a chordal graph, SIAM Journal on
     Computing 1 (1972) 180–187.

[41] F. Gavril, The intersection graphs of subtrees in trees are exactly the chordal
     graphs, Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 16 (1974) 47–56.

                                           227
[42] N. Korte and R. H. Möhring, An incremental linear-time algorithm for recognizing
     interval graphs, SIAM Journal on Computing 18 (1989) 68–81.

[43] D. J. Rose, R. E. Tarjan, and G. S. Lueker, Algorithmic aspects of vertex
     elimination on graphs, SIAM Journal on Computing 5 (1976) 266–283.

[44] M. Farber, Independent domination in chordal graphs, Operations Research Letters
     1 (1982) 134–138.

[45] Y. Okamoto, T. Uno, and R. Uehara, Counting the number of independent sets in
     chordal graphs, J. Discrete Algorithms 6 (2008) 229–242.

[46] I. Bezáková and W. Sun, Mixing of Markov chains for independent sets on chordal
     graphs with bounded separators, in International Computing and Combinatorics
     Conference (COCOON), pp. 664–676, 2020.

[47] H. N. de Ridder et. al., Information system on graph classes and their inclusions
     (ISGCI), www.graphclasses.org (2016).

[48] D. Gusfield, The multi-state perfect phylogeny problem with missing and removable
     data: Solutions via integer-programming and chordal graph theory, in Research in
     Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB), pp. 236–252, 2009.

[49] T. Przytycka, G. Davis, N. Song, and D. Durand, Graph theoretical insights into
     evolution of multidomain proteins, Journal of Computational Biology 13 (2006)
     351–363.

[50] M. Wienöbst, M. Bannach, and M. Liśkiewicz, Polynomial-time algorithms for
     counting and sampling Markov equivalent DAGs, in The Thirty-Fifth AAAI
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 12198–12206, 2021.

[51] D. J. Rose, A graph-theoretic study of the numerical solution of sparse positive
     definite systems of linear equations, in Graph Theory and Computing, pp. 183–217.
     Elsevier, 1972.

[52] M. Yannakakis, Computing the minimum fill-in is NP-complete, SIAM Journal on
     Algebraic Discrete Methods 2 (1981) 77–79.

[53] E. Bender, L. Richmond, and N. Wormald, Almost all chordal graphs split, Journal
     of the Australian Mathematical Society 38 (1985) 214–221.

[54] S. Kratsch and M. Wahlström, Compression via matroids: A randomized
     polynomial kernel for odd cycle transversal, ACM Transactions on Algorithms
     (TALG) 10 (2014) 1–15.



                                          228
[55] D. Lokshtanov, N. Narayanaswamy, V. Raman, M. Ramanujan, and S. Saurabh,
     Faster parameterized algorithms using linear programming, ACM Transactions on
     Algorithms (TALG) 11 (2014) 1–31.

[56] J. Derbisz, L. Kanesh, J. Madathil, A. Sahu, S. Saurabh, and S. Verma, A
     polynomial kernel for bipartite permutation vertex deletion, Algorithmica 84 (2022)
     3246–3275.

[57] L. Bożyk, J. Derbisz, T. Krawczyk, J. Novotná, and K. Okrasa, Vertex deletion
     into bipartite permutation graphs, Algorithmica 84 (2022) 2271–2291.

[58] M. Xiao, On a generalization of Nemhauser and Trotter’s local optimization
     theorem, Journal of Computer and System Sciences 84 (2017) 97–106.

[59] M. Xiao, A parameterized algorithm for bounded-degree vertex deletion, in
     International Computing and Combinatorics Conference, pp. 79–91, Springer, 2016.

[60] L. Mathieson, The parameterized complexity of editing graphs for bounded
     degeneracy, Theoretical Computer Science 411 (2010) 3181–3187.

[61] F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, N. Misra, and S. Saurabh, Planar F-deletion:
     Approximation, kernelization and optimal FPT algorithms, in 2012 IEEE 53rd
     Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 470–479, IEEE, 2012.

[62] A. Agrawal, D. Lokshtanov, P. Misra, S. Saurabh, and M. Zehavi, Feedback vertex
     set inspired kernel for chordal vertex deletion, ACM Transactions on Algorithms
     (TALG) 15 (2018) 1–28.

[63] Y. Cao and D. Marx, Chordal editing is fixed-parameter tractable, Algorithmica 75
     (2016) 118–137.

[64] F. V. Fomin, T. Le, D. Lokshtanov, S. Saurabh, S. Thomassé, and M. Zehavi,
     Subquadratic kernels for implicit 3-Hitting Set and 3-Set Packing problems, ACM
     Transactions on Algorithms (TALG) 15 (2019) 1–44.

[65] D. Tsur, Faster parameterized algorithm for cluster vertex deletion, Theory of
     Computing Systems 65 (2021) 323–343.

[66] F. V. Fomin, S. Gaspers, D. Kratsch, M. Liedloff, and S. Saurabh, Iterative
     compression and exact algorithms, Theoretical Computer Science 411 (2010)
     1045–1053.

[67] E. J. Kim and O. Kwon, A polynomial kernel for distance-hereditary vertex
     deletion, Algorithmica 83 (2021) 2096–2141.



                                          229
[68] E. Eiben, R. Ganian, and O. Kwon, A single-exponential fixed-parameter algorithm
     for distance-hereditary vertex deletion, Journal of Computer and System Sciences
     97 (2018) 121–146.

[69] S. Thomassé, A 4k 2 kernel for feedback vertex set, ACM Transactions on
     Algorithms (TALG) 6 (2010) 1–8.

[70] Y. Cao, J. Chen, and Y. Liu, On feedback vertex set: New measure and new
     structures, Algorithmica 73 (2015) 63–86.

[71] J. Chen, I. A. Kanj, and W. Jia, Vertex cover: Further observations and further
     improvements, Journal of Algorithms 41 (2001) 280–301.

[72] D. G. Harris and N. S. Narayanaswamy, A faster algorithm for vertex cover
     parameterized by solution size, in 41st International Symposium on Theoretical
     Aspects of Computer Science (STACS 2024), vol. 289 of Leibniz International
     Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pp. 40:1–40:18, Schloss Dagstuhl –
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.

[73] A. Agrawal, D. Lokshtanov, P. Misra, S. Saurabh, and M. Zehavi, Polynomial
     kernel for interval vertex deletion, ACM Transactions on Algorithms (TALG) 19
     (2023) 1–68.

[74] Y. Cao, Linear recognition of almost interval graphs, in Proceedings of the
     Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
     pp. 1096–1115, SIAM, 2016.

[75] H. Donkers, B. M. Jansen, and M. Wlodarczyk, Preprocessing for outerplanar
     vertex deletion: An elementary kernel of quartic size, Algorithmica 84 (2022)
     3407–3458.

[76] P. Heggernes, P. Van’t Hof, B. M. Jansen, S. Kratsch, and Y. Villanger,
     Parameterized complexity of vertex deletion into perfect graph classes, Theoretical
     Computer Science 511 (2013) 172–180.

[77] B. M. Jansen and M. Wlodarczyk, Lossy planarization: A constant-factor
     approximate kernelization for planar vertex deletion, in Proceedings of the 54th
     Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 900–913, 2022.

[78] B. M. Jansen, D. Lokshtanov, and S. Saurabh, A near-optimal planarization
     algorithm, in Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
     Discrete Algorithms, pp. 1802–1811, SIAM, 2014.

[79] F. V. Fomin, S. Saurabh, and Y. Villanger, A polynomial kernel for proper interval
     vertex deletion, SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 27 (2013) 1964–1976.

                                           230
[80] Y. Cao, Unit interval editing is fixed-parameter tractable, Information and
     Computation 253 (2017) 109–126.

[81] E. Ghosh, S. Kolay, M. Kumar, P. Misra, F. Panolan, A. Rai, and M. Ramanujan,
     Faster parameterized algorithms for deletion to split graphs, Algorithmica 71 (2015)
     989–1006.

[82] M. Cygan and M. Pilipczuk, Split vertex deletion meets vertex cover: New
     fixed-parameter and exact exponential-time algorithms, Information Processing
     Letters 113 (2013) 179–182.

[83] Ú. Hébert-Johnson, D. Lokshtanov, and E. Vigoda, Counting and sampling labeled
     chordal graphs in polynomial time, in 31st Annual European Symposium on
     Algorithms (ESA 2023), vol. 274 of Leibniz International Proceedings in
     Informatics (LIPIcs), (Dagstuhl, Germany), pp. 58:1–58:17, Schloss Dagstuhl –
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023.

[84] Ú. Hébert-Johnson and D. Lokshtanov, Sampling unlabeled chordal graphs in
     expected polynomial time, in 42nd International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects
     of Computer Science (STACS 2025), vol. 327 of Leibniz International Proceedings
     in Informatics (LIPIcs), (Dagstuhl, Germany), pp. 46:1–46:20, Schloss Dagstuhl –
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025.

[85] N. C. Wormald, Counting labelled chordal graphs, Graphs and Combinatorics 1
     (1985) 193–200.

[86] L. Markenzon, O. Vernet, and L. H. Araujo, Two methods for the generation of
     chordal graphs, Annals of Operations Research 157 (2008) 47–60.

[87] O. Şeker, P. Heggernes, T. Ekim, and Z. C. Taşkın, Linear-time generation of
     random chordal graphs, in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
     Algorithms and Complexity (CIAC), pp. 442–453, 2017.

[88] T. Ekim, M. Shalom, and O. Şeker, The complexity of subtree intersection
     representation of chordal graphs and linear time chordal graph generation, Journal
     of Combinatorial Optimization 41 (2021) 710–735.

[89] A. Mukhopadhyay and M. Z. Rahman, Algorithms for generating strongly chordal
     graphs, in Transactions on Computational Science XXXVIII, pp. 54–75, 2021.

[90] J. R. Blair and B. Peyton, An introduction to chordal graphs and clique trees, in
     Graph Theory and Sparse Matrix Computation, pp. 1–29. Springer, 1993.

[91] D. Harvey and J. Van Der Hoeven, Integer multiplication in time O(n log n),
     Annals of Mathematics 193 (2021) 563–617.

                                          231
[92] J. D. Dixon and H. S. Wilf, The random selection of unlabeled graphs, Journal of
     Algorithms 4 (1983) 205–213.

[93] W. Oberschelp, Kombinatorische anzahlbestimmungen in relationen,
     Mathematische Annalen 174 (1967) 53–78.

[94] F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, S. Saurabh, and M. Zehavi, Kernelization: Theory of
     parameterized preprocessing. Cambridge University Press, 2019.




                                         232
